v
Editors’ Introduction
This is the sixth issue of Tolkien Studies, the first refereed journal solely
devoted to the scholarly study of the works of J.R.R. Tolkien. As editors, our goal is to publish excellent scholarship on Tolkien as well as
to gather useful research information, reviews, notes, documents, and
bibliographical material.
In this issue we are especially pleased to publish Tolkien’s note on
“Fate and Free Will,” edited by Carl Hostetter.
With this exception, and that of the lead article (which was solicited
from an expert in the field), all articles have been subject to anonymous,
external review as well as receiving a positive judgment by the Editors.
In the cases of articles by individuals associated with the journal in any
way, each article had to receive at least two positive evaluations from
two different outside reviewers. Reviewer comments were anonymously
conveyed to the authors of the articles. The Editors agreed to be bound
by the recommendations of the outside referees.
Douglas A. Anderson
Michael D. C. Drout
Verlyn Fliegervii
Acknowledgments
The Editors would like to thank Wheaton College, Norton, MA, Provost Elita Pastra-Landis, and Wheaton Research Partners for their support. Wheaton’s Balfour Scholarship program and the Clemence Family
supported summer research that was essential to the production of the
Bibliography. The efforts of editorial assistants Jason Rea, Lauren Provost, Tara McGoldrick and Kathryn Paar contributed immensely to the
success of the issue, as did Paula Smith-MacDonald, Vaughn Howland
and Raquel D’Oyen. It has continued to be a pleasure to work with West
Virginia University Press; thanks to Patrick Conner, Carrie Mullen, and
especially to Hilary Attfield for all her work in the production of the issue. For permission to publish Tolkien’s note on “Fate and Free Will” the
editors would like to thank Cathleen Blackburn, the Tolkien Estate, and
Christopher Tolkien. Finally, we acknowledge a special debt of gratitude
to our anonymous, outside reviewers who with their collegial service contribute so much to Tolkien Studies.
In Memoriam
This year Tolkien Studies remarks on the passing of two distinguished
members in our field, artist Pauline Baynes, and scholar and publisher
Derek Brewer.
Pauline Diana Baynes (1922-2008), the prolific artist and illustrator,
was perhaps best known for her illustrations to the seven volumes of C.
S. Lewis’s Chronicles of Narnia (1950-56). Baynes had previously illustrated
Tolkien’s Farmer Giles of Ham (1949), and over the years continued her
association with Tolkien’s works, providing wrap-around cover art for the
1961 Puffin edition of The Hobbit and a triptych for the slip-case of the
1964 deluxe edition of The Lord of the Rings, and illustrating The Adventures
of Tom Bombadil (1962), Smith of Wootton Major (1967), A Map of Middle-earth
(poster, 1970), There and Back Again (poster, based on The Hobbit, 1971); Poems and Stories (1980), and Bilbo’s Last Song (poster 1974; book 1990). Her
final Tolkien-related illustration appears, fittingly, to have been a return
to her earliest such work—her map of “The Little Kingdom” was added
to the fiftieth anniversary edition of Farmer Giles of Ham (1999).
Derek Brewer (1923-2008), Emeritus Professor of English at Cambridge, was a well-known medievalist and an early champion of Tolkien’s
writings. Brewer’s essay on “The Lord of the Rings as Romance” appeared
in J.R.R. Tolkien, Scholar and Story-teller: Essays in Memoriam (1979), edited
by Mary Salu and Robert T. Farrell.viii
Conventions and Abbreviations
Because there are so many editions of The Hobbit and The Lord of the
Rings, citations will be by book and chapter as well as by page-number
(referenced to the editions listed below). Thus a citation from The Fellowship of the Ring, book two, chapter four, page 318 is written (FR, II, iv, 318).
References to the Appendices of The Lord of the Rings are abbreviated by
Appendix, Section and subsection. Thus subsection iii of section I of
Appendix A is written (RK, Appendix A, I, iii, 321). The “Silmarillion”
indicates the body of stories and poems developed over many years by
Tolkien; The Silmarillion indicates the volume first published in 1977.
Abbreviations
B&C Beowulf and the Critics. Ed. Michael D. C. Drout. Tempe,
AZ: Arizona Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies,
2002. Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies 248.
Bombadil The Adventures of Tom Bombadil, London: George Allen &
Unwin, 1962; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1963.
CH The Children of Húrin [title as on title page:] Narn i Chîn Húrin:
The Tale of the Children of Húrin. Ed. Christopher Tolkien.
London: HarperCollins, 2007; Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
2007.
FG Farmer Giles of Ham. Ed. Christina Scull and Wayne G.
Hammond. London: HarperCollins, 1999. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1999.
FR The Fellowship of the Ring. London: George Allen & Unwin,
1954; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1954. Second edition,
revised impression, Boston: Houghton Mifflin,1987.
H The Hobbit. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1937. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1938. The Annotated Hobbit. Ed. Douglas
A. Anderson. Second edition, revised. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 2002.
Jewels The War of the Jewels. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:
HarperCollins; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1994.
Lays The Lays of Beleriand. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:
George Allen & Unwin; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1985.ix
Letters The Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien. Ed. Humphrey Carpenter, with
the assistance of Christopher Tolkien. London: George
Allen & Unwin; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1981.
Lost Road The Lost Road and Other Writings. Ed. Christopher Tolkien.
London: Unwin Hyman; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987.
Lost Tales I The Book of Lost Tales, Part One. Ed. Christopher Tolkien.
London: George Allen & Unwin, 1983; Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1984.
Lost Tales II The Book of Lost Tales, Part Two. Ed. Christopher Tolkien.
London: George Allen & Unwin; Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1984.
MC The Monsters and the Critics and Other Essays. Ed. Christopher
Tolkien. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1983; Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1984.
Morgoth Morgoth’s Ring. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:
HarperCollins; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1993.
OFS Tolkien On Fairy-stories: Extended Edition. Ed. Verlyn Flieger
and Douglas A. Anderson. London: HarperCollins, 2008.
Peoples The Peoples of Middle-earth. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:
HarperCollins; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1996.
RK The Return of the King. London: George Allen & Unwin
1955; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1956. Second edition,
revised impression, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987.
S The Silmarillion. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London: George
Allen & Unwin, 1977. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1977.
Second edition. London:HarperCollins, 1999; Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 2001.
Sauron Sauron Defeated. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:
HarperCollins; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1992.
Shadow The Return of the Shadow. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:
Unwin Hyman; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1988.
Shaping The Shaping of Middle-earth. Ed. Christopher Tolkien.
London: George Allen & Unwin; Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1986.x
SWM Smith of Wootton Major: Extended Edition. Ed. Verlyn Flieger.
London: HarperCollins, 2005.
TL Tree and Leaf. London: Unwin Books, 1964; Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1965. Expanded as Tree and Leaf,
including the Poem Mythpoeia [and] The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth
Beorhthelm’s Son. London: HarperCollins, 2001.
TT The Two Towers. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1954;
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1955. Second edition, revised
impression, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987.
Treason The Treason of Isengard. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:
Unwin Hyman; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1989.
UT Unfinished Tales of Númenor and Middle-Earth. Ed. Christopher
Tolkien. London: George Allen & Unwin; Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1980.
War The War of the Ring. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:
Unwin Hyman; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1990.1
Copyright © West Virginia University Press
“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary
Craftsman
JOHN D. RATELIFF
At the beginning of J.R.R. Tolkien’s professional career, he made a revealing comment in a letter to Mary Wright, the wife of Joseph
Wright (his old tutor and mentor as a philologist), expressing his feelings
whenever he browsed in her husband’s massive six-volume English Dialect
Dictionary:
Middle English is an exciting field—almost uncharted I begin to think, because as soon as one turns detailed personal
attention on to any little corner of it the received notions and
ideas seem to crumple up and fall to pieces. (Letters 11)
This I think very neatly describes the current state of Tolkien studies.
There is a growing consensus on many points, but much of this broad
agreement relies upon assumptions which in turn are based upon details that by and large have gone unexamined. And Tolkien was a details man, who distrusted any critical approach that dealt in generalities
(like the so-called “monomyth” of Joseph Campbell, which would have
been anathema to Tolkien).1 Tolkien found most of his own inspiration
in close consideration of minute particulars. As in his professional work,
so too in his storytelling: The Lord of the Rings is an easily summarized
story, but any summary—“reluctant hero embarks on grueling quest to destroy
evil artifact”—leaves out the details that bring the tale to life and give it
its appeal—indeed, one might say, that make it worth reading. It is from
the details that Tolkien crafted his world, and such details will well repay
our attention, particularly the details whose significance emerges only
through close study of Tolkien’s texts and manuscripts, such as the History
of Middle-earth series and the treasure-troves at Marquette University’s
Special Collections and Archive and the Bodleian Library’s Department
of Western Manuscripts. There has been a great deal of attention focused on why Tolkien created his legendarium; by focusing more on how
we can better understand how he made it so compelling.
“Labour and Thought”
The first and most important point to make about Tolkien as a writer
is to recognize the sheer amount of time, thought, and effort he was willing to put into his work. The stories did not just emerge whole, channeled
by an artiste in a rhapsody out of some kind of collective consciousness
(or uncollected unconsciousness); they were made, by a master craftsman2
John D. Rateliff
whose medium was words, ink, paper. We must, accordingly, take into
account a craftman’s practical considerations. When he was creating The
Lord of the Rings, Tolkien was not just “expressing himself ”: he was writing for publication as well. As he put it in a letter to Stanley Unwin, the
success of The Hobbit (which he had written to amuse himself and his
family and friends, and not submitted to a publisher until years after he
had finished it) allowed him to hope “whether duty and desire may not
(perhaps) in future go more closely together.”2 Indeed, Tolkien wrote The
Lord of the Rings at a publisher’s request, although the form it took was
entirely Tolkien’s own and differed considerably from what the publisher
had imagined. So although he wanted to try his hand at a really long
story (FR, Foreword to the Second Edition, 6) he did not want to produce an unpublishable book. If we want to draw an analogy from among
his characters (a favorite preoccupation of Tolkien scholars, at least as
far back as Clyde Kilby’s Tolkien and The Silmarillion), Tolkien is not the
responsibility-shirking solitary artist Niggle from “Leaf by Niggle,” concerned only with capturing a private vision. Instead, he is more like the
craftsman Smith from Smith of Wootton Major: someone who makes useful
and beautiful things, which he shares with his community; who has great
gifts which he uses to provide for his family.
Tolkien himself emphasizes the amount of work involved in what he
was doing:
Fantasy has . . . an essential drawback: it is difficult to
achieve. . . . Anyone inheriting the fantastic device of human
language can say the green sun. Many can then imagine or
picture it. But that is not enough. . . . To make a Secondary
World inside which the green sun will be credible . . . will .
. . require labour and thought, and will certainly demand
a special skill, a kind of elvish craft. Few attempt such difficult tasks. But when they are attempted and in any degree
accomplished then we have a rare achievement . . . indeed
narrative art, story-making in its primary and most potent
mode. (MC 139-40)
Of the three elements traditionally taken to make up a story—setting,
characterization, and plot—Tolkien has been universally acknowledged
to excel in the first; that is, world-building: Middle-earth is made vividly
real to the reader. For the second point, earlier critics sometimes underestimated his powers of characterization—Ursula K. LeGuin once
made the astonishing confession that she could not tell Merry and Pippin apart3—but one of the good effects of the Jackson films has been
that, by raising a debate on whether Jackson got certain characters right,
they have focused attention on the unappreciated subtlety of Tolkien’s3
“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsman
own characterization. Finally, on the third point, Tolkien has been much
praised, by all but the most churlish, as a storyteller, for being adroit at
presenting a gripping plot. Indeed, Richard West long ago wrote a seminal essay on Tolkien’s gift with polyphonic narrative, his ability to move
back and forth between the various strands of the plot without ever losing track of the main thrust of the story. Diana Wynne Jones, herself a
successful fantasy author, wrote from the point of view of a fellow author
when she praised Tolkien’s skill in managing a long, complex plot while
keeping his readers enthralled and concluded, “there really was nothing
about narrative that Tolkien didn’t know.”4
Where Tolkien has been mercilessly criticized has been on quite different grounds. First, for his subject matter (indeed, that anyone should
write fantasy at all in this day and age). Second, for what is taken to be
his affirmation of traditional values (which by the way is far more subtle
and double-edged than either his admirers or his critics sometimes realize, a point nicely made in Marjorie Burns’s Perilous Realms). And third,
for his style. Since the first topic, his subject matter, has been masterfully
addressed by Tolkien himself in his essays “Beowulf: The Monsters and
The Critics” and “On Fairy-stories,” and since the second, attacks on
his values system, tend to be politically motivated and self-defeating, reflecting worse on those who make them (e.g., China Miéville, Germaine
Greer) than on their intended target, I would like to focus in on the third
topic: Tolkien’s style.
Tolkien’s style is the tool with which he crafts his story. So it seems
distinctly odd that, among all the attention that have been focused on
that story, there has been very little critique of his style, aside from Tolkien’s own spirited defense5 of his occasional use of archaisms in certain
contexts and Brian Rosebury’s careful demonstration of the obvious but
often-overlooked point that while Tolkien is frequently accused of writing “Biblical” prose, dense and inverted and artificial and archaic, in fact
the vast majority of The Lord of the Rings is written in ordinary everyday
English. It is no surprise that a disgruntled Edmund Wilson flatly asserted that both Tolkien’s prose and poetry are bad (328), but what are we
to make of Stephen Medcalf ’s outrageous claim that Tolkien “really was
ill-at-ease with his own language”?6 Or Burton Raffel, who although he
uses words like “magnificent,” “entrancing,” “extraordinary,” “superb,”
“wonderful,” and “a genuine epic” to describe The Lord of the Rings nonetheless asserts that it is not “literature” because it is too readable? That
is, so far as I understand him, that its prose is meant to deliver the story
rather than be savored like a rare cheese or, in his words, “there is no
real attempt to explore sensory realities; only narrative realities matter to
Tolkien, and so adept is he that nothing more matters to us” (222). Raffel
argues that Tolkien excels in delivering an engrossing story that sweeps4
John D. Rateliff
the reader along, but asserts that “the language of literature must do
more than this, must transmit information as well as sense impressions of
some sort, and to effect this the language must be both more deeply felt
and more deeply worked” (221).
I will return to Raffel’s strictures in a minute, but first I want to draw
attention to Tolkien’s own description of how his prose works, of what
he was trying to achieve. In one of the endnotes appended to “On Fairystories,” he includes the following revealing passage setting forth his narrative method, in which he makes clear his goal of writing in such a way
as to draw in his readers, making them participate in the creation of
the fictional world by encouraging them to draw on their own personal
memories when reading one of his evocative passages:
However good in themselves, illustrations do little good to
fairy-stories. The . . . distinction between all art . . . that offers
a visible presentation and true literature is that [the former]
imposes one visible form. Literature [by contrast] works
from mind to mind and is thus . . . at once more universal
and more poignantly particular. If it speaks of bread or wine
or stone or tree, it appeals to the whole of these things, to their
ideas; yet each hearer will give to them a peculiar personal
embodiment in his imagination. Should the story say “he ate
bread,” the dramatic producer or painter can only show “a
piece of bread” . . . but the hearer of the story will think of
bread in general and picture it in some form of his own. If
a story says “he climbed a hill and saw a river in the valley
below,” the illustrator may catch, or nearly catch, his own
vision of such a scene; but every hearer of the words will
have his own picture, and it will be made out of all the hills
and rivers and dales he has ever seen, but specially out of
The Hill, The River, The Valley which were for him the first
embodiment of the word. (MC 159)7
Tolkien’s contrast here of a single image presented to the passive viewer
with the internal personalized visualization of a reader, who thus participates in the (sub)creation of the work, is of a piece with his championing,
in the Foreword of the second edition to The Lord of the Rings, of what
he calls applicability: his refusal to impose a single authorial or “allegorical” meaning on a work.8 I would argue that the style in which he chose
to write, which he painstakingly developed over several decades until it
reached its peak in The Hobbit and Farmer Giles of Ham and The Lord of the
Rings and some of the late Silmarillion material, is deliberately crafted
to spark reader participation. That many readers do get drawn in is witnessed by the intense investment so many people have in these books, the5
“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsman
strong personal connection they form with the story, the almost visceral
rejection of illustrations or dramatizations that do not fit their own inner vision of the characters, the returning to reread the books again and
again to renew our acquaintance with the imaginary world.
Keeping that in mind, I would like to return to Raffel’s claim about
the need for literary fiction to “explore sensory realities.” Clearly, some
writers excel at just the sort of writing Raffel holds up as his paradigm.
And, just as clearly, others excel in quite different ways. Contrast, for
example, the following two passages, the first by Tolkien, the second by
fellow fantasy author John Bellairs:
The Company now gathered together as close to the cliff
as they could. It faced southwards, and near the bottom it
leaned out a little, so that they hoped it would give them
some protection from the northerly wind and from the falling stones. But eddying blasts swirled round them from every
side, and the snow flowed down in ever denser clouds.
They huddled together with their backs to the wall. . . .
A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinking
fast into a warm and hazy dream. He thought a fire was
heating his toes, and out of the shadows on the other side of
the hearth he heard Bilbo’s voice speaking. I don’t think much
of your diary, he said. Snowstorms on January the twelfth: there was
no need to come back to report that!
But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo, Frodo answered with an
effort, when he felt himself shaken, and he came back painfully to wakefulness. Boromir had lifted him off the ground
out of a nest of snow.
“This will be the death of the halflings, Gandalf,” said
Boromir. . . . (FR, II, iii, 303)
It did not look haunted, especially at noon, this crowded,
textured, interwoven wood. Prospero saw every shade of
green, from light, bleached, papery, yellow-green to a dark,
wet, inky green that was almost black. Willows, poplars, maples, oaks, and stubby kinked mulberry trees. . . .
Once he was actually inside the forest . . . Prospero knew
what was wrong. There are times when you feel that you hear
doors slamming in the distance, voices calling your name;
you see blurred things, far away or very close up, that look
like people until you focus on them. That was the trouble.
The whole place seemed slightly out of focus, very slightly
off. It was as if you were half asleep. . . . [H]e had to stare at6
John D. Rateliff
a tree for several seconds before it looked like a tree and not a
leaning furry shadow. He felt very nervous, drowsily nervous,
with prickling dark borders on his sight. A . . . bell was ringing somewhere deep, deep in the forest. An icy green glass
bell ridged with frost, trembling on a green willow branch.
(Bellairs 74, 76)
Of these, note that in the passage from Tolkien, he does not describe
every detail—what color were the rocks? who was on either side of Frodo
as he sat huddled against the bitter cold? But Tolkien does tell us everything we need to know, in general terms with just enough specific detail
to bring the scene home, to guide the reader’s imagination, to draw on
our own memories of being cold and frozen, exhausted and miserable.
We do not need to know what Frodo looked like, because we are looking
through his eyes; too much detail would actually limit the applicability.
The excerpt from Bellairs, by contrast, almost baroque in its elaboration when contrasted to Tolkien’s plainstyle, tells us everything we need
to know and more; it paints a vivid word-picture to help us precisely
visualize the scene. Bellairs masterfully creates what it is like to be doing
something that frightens you but which you have decided you must see
through, the first stages of what will within a few pages become pure
panic-stricken terror. But it’s a scene viewed from outside; we identify
with the character’s experience, but we do not contribute to it.
Raffel might say that the transparency of Tolkien’s prose carries the
reader along on the surface of a fast-flowing river, while Bellairs’ opaqueness causes him or her to sink into and savor the moment, surrounded
by the specificity of the experience. But I would reverse the metaphor
and instead suggest that Tolkien deliberately withholds the kind of detail
Bellairs provides so that the reader is nudged into providing it himself or
herself, since this participation draws the reader into the work.
In addition, I think another element is at work here, one not planned
by Tolkien but nonetheless present throughout The Lord of the Rings: he
often describes a scene not as you would experience it but as you would
remember it afterwards. That is, his prose assumes the tone of things
which have already happened, as they are stored in our memory. Thus
the “walking bits,” which have so annoyed impatient readers who are
only reading for the plot, do not in fact detail every day of Frodo’s yearlong journey but instead are rendered down to a relatively few vivid images, such as would linger in the memory long after the event. After you
have read these passages and think back on them, they very strongly
resemble your actual memories of similar events (in fact, the very ones
that provided the mental images that flashed through your mind when
reading them) : a general recollection of where you were and what you7
“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsman
were doing anchored by a few sharp, vivid, specific details that stand out.
Thus the memory of reading the story gains the associations of events in
the reader’s own life, because the one has already drawn upon the other.
“A Rare Achievement”
In order to support my claim that Tolkien was a master craftsman
in his chosen medium, words, I would like to look at three specific cases
where close examination of detail highlights the “labour and thought”
that underlie his “rare achievement” and, I think, casts some light on his
working method. It is sometimes said that “the devil is in the details,” but
in fact this is a modern reversal of the original proverb, which was “God
is in the details.” In any case, it is in such detailed examinations that the
hand of the craftsman who made the piece shows up; looking at almost
any point in Tolkien’s complex prose reveals the careful construction,
and dense web of words and allusions and images and associations, that
underlie his tale.
For my first example, I would like to look at the description of the
moon rising over Lake Town during the battle with Smaug. As the scene
was originally drafted, the moon does not appear, but Tolkien quickly
added several significant references: first the thrush’s warning
“Wait, wait” it said “the moon is rising. Look for the hollow
of the left breast as he flies and turns above you.” Then Bard
drew his last arrow from his quiver. The dragon was circling
back, and the moon rose above the eastern shore and silvered his
great wings. (Rateliff, Return to Bag-End 549; my emphasis)
Also added at this time is the detail of Smaug’s fatal weak spot showing
up in the moonlight:
As he turned and dived down his belly glittered white with
sparkling fire in the moon—but not in one spot. (550)
Finally, the beautiful little passage describing the aftermath of the dragon’s death and spectacular fall into the dark waters opens by focusing our
attention on the moon:
The moon rose higher and higher, and the North wind grew loud
and cold. It twisted the white fog upon the lake into bending
pillars and hurrying clouds, and drove it off to the West to
scatter in tattered wisps over the marshes before Mirkwood.
Then the many boats could be seen dotted on the surface of
the lake, and down the wind came the sound of the voices of
the people of Esgaroth lamenting their lost town and goods
and ruined homes. (554; my emphasis)8
John D. Rateliff
Now, I think it is clear that Tolkien here has a very strong visual image of the scene which he is concerned to convey to us as clearly and
vividly as possible.9 This is a clear departure from his usual style, where
he sets up a framework then leaves most details to the reader’s imagining.
But a true craftsman has more than one tool, more than one technique,
to achieve his ends. A departure from the norm, offering up a sharp
contrast to what came before and what follows, can be very effective.
This particular technique was a favorite of his friend C. S. Lewis, who
frequently began his own stories with a mental picture which he then
built a story around.10 Major Warnie Lewis, CSL’s older brother, goes
further and recounts in his diary that during one evening’s Inklings meeting (which Tolkien attended) the Major:
made the always cheering discovery that what I had assumed to be an individual mental anfractuosity,11 is shared
by J[ack], i.e. that we can both only imagine what comes into
our heads, but cannot direct our imaginations. For instance,
said I, when I picture the country house I would have if I
were a rich man, I can say that my study window opens on a
level park full of old timber: but I see undulating ground with
a fir topped knoll. I can of course fix my mind on the level
park, but when I turn to the window again after arranging
my books, there is the knoll once more. J says it is the same
with him when he is writing a novel: he must use the knoll and
can’t force himself to use the level park. (193)
Tolkien’s own literary inspirations tended by his own testimony to
come more from euphonious names (like “Earendel”) and invented words
(like “hobbit”), but a process similar to the one Lewis describes is clearly
at work in scenes like this one—sharp, detailed moments that contrast
with Tolkien’s usual practice but serve to punctuate the story. And sometimes that mental image contained elements that introduced contradictions into the story. What Tolkien is describing here—a dark night slowly
lit by the moon rising in the east—is something that could only take place
at the time of a full moon or, more probably, one a little past full (since a
true full moon rises at the same time as the sun sets, which does not seem
to be the case here; at least some period of full darkness intervenes). This
is confirmed by two illustrations Tolkien did for the book, both of which,
at least as originally drawn, show a full moon in the eastern sky on the
night of the dragon’s marauding (Return to Bag-End, Plate X, bottom; and
Plate XII, top). But we know from reading the story that Smaug’s attack
came only a little over twenty-four hours after the opening of the Secret
Door, on the night of the day following Durin’s Day, and that Durin’s
Day (“as all should know”) only occurs at the time of the New Moon,9
“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsman
when the moon appears as the thinnest crescent low in the Western sky.
We thus have a paradox: we know that the moon must be in a specific
phase (a thin crescent in the west, already in the sky when the sun sets,
and setting itself a short time later), but the description of it rising in the
eastern sky well after dark shows it is somehow at the other end of its cycle,
as if two weeks had passed in two nights. Now, we could just accept the
fantasy explanation—after all, this is a world where stars fall from the
sky at the sound of the dragon’s death cry (Return to Bag-End 549, 554)
and the moon is actually a giant flower taken from the White Tree of
Valinor and set to sail through the sky under the guidance of Tilion the
Maia, whom we are told several times is wayward in his journeys across
the night sky (“The Sketch of the Mythology,” Shaping 20; “The Quenta”
of 1930, Shaping 97). But Tolkien was too good an amateur astronomer,
or became too good an astronomer during the writing of The Lord of the
Rings, to let that pass, and at some point he noticed the discrepancy and
tried to fix it.
Thus the sketch “Death of Smaug” (circa 1937) has a crescent superimposed over the original full moon and the annotation in the margin
“The moon should be a crescent: it was only a few nights after the New
Moon on ‘Durin’s Day’” (Return to Bag-End 561). In the 1966 Third Edition Hobbit, he altered the passage so that instead of “The moon rose
higher” it now reads “The waxing moon rose higher” (Anderson, The
Annotated Hobbit 308, 312). Unfortunately, this does not resolve the problem, since while these two suggested fixes put the moon in its right phase
(more or less) they leave it in the wrong part of the sky. So, we see that
Tolkien employed a variety of techniques, of which we have looked at
only two, but that mixing them sometimes created problems of its own.
This was a price he was willing to accept, like a carpenter using the knots
in fine-grained wood for their appealing contrast, despite their lack of
symmetry with the whole.
For my second example, I would like to focus in on a discovery made
by my friend the late Taum Santoski that remained unpublished until
the recent release of Mr. Baggins, in which we see Tolkien crafting a place
name. This is a good example of the kind of information that can only
be learned from close study of the manuscripts at Marquette; you could
never discover it from looking at the final published book, no matter how
deeply you delved. Tolkien’s gift for nomenclature has been widely acknowledged, but not the work he put into it; most who have drawn any
attention to it simply take it for granted as a knack Tolkien was lucky
enough to have, not as the result of deliberate craft.12
The manuscript shows that Tolkien originally intended for Bilbo to
rendezvous with the dwarves not at the Green Dragon Inn, as in the published book, but at the Great Mill. At a very late stage (February 1937),10
John D. Rateliff
when he was correcting the first set of page proofs from the publisher
after the book had been set up in type, he struck out the Great Mill across
the Water and instead penciled in the margin the Green Man inn by the Water,
at the same time making corresponding pencil changes to the next page,
so that [1] down the lane, and over the bridge, across The Water becomes down
the lane, past the great Mill, across The Water; [2] when he got to the Great Mill
becomes when he got to Bywater; and [3] instead of standing at the mill-door
Balin is on lookout standing at the inn door (Marquette 1/2/1: 41). But before returning the corrected proofs to Unwin Brothers (Allen & Unwin’s
printers) he revisited the passage and changed it again, in ink, to the Green
Dragon Inn, Bywater. Aside from marking the emergence of the name Bywater, these changes are interesting because each name in Tolkien’s sequence of choices has distinctive resonances in his life and work.
• The first, the Great Mill, is directly based upon an actual mill Tolkien lived next to when he was growing up (between the ages of
four to eight), Sarehole Mill on the River Cole in what is now the
Hall Green area on the south side of Birmingham. Unlike the inn
that replaced it in the story, which Tolkien never drew, the Mill is
featured clearly in all Tolkien’s illustrations of Hobbiton, centered
in the foreground (e.g., Mr. Baggins Plate IV top, and Hammond
and Scull, Artist and Illustrator 100–107). And, renamed Sandyman’s
Mill, it features in The Lord of the Rings a generation or two later,
where its transformation into a pollution-belching factory is one of
the iconic examples of Sharkey’s corruption of the Shire.13
• Tolkien’s second choice, the Green Man inn, draws on traditional
English folklore about the Green Man—who seems to be a modern conflation of two figures, or perhaps two separate expressions of the same figure: the first a leafy face often found carved
in English churches about which little is known and the second
a wild man appearing in masques and village pageants and also
frequently represented on Inn signs. Tolkien later developed these
in two separate ways in The Lord of the Rings: the former as the
ents, or tree-folk, and the latter as the woodwoses or “wild men of
the woods.” It is worth noting that many believe that some form
of the Green Man lies behind the antagonist in Sir Gawain and the
Green Knight, one of the three works Tolkien was most associated
with as a medieval scholar (the other two being Beowulf and the Ancrene Wisse).14In any case The Green Man was already a traditional
name for an English Inn long before Tolkien’s time, and remains
popular today—for example, there was a Green Man in Leeds
(since demolished) during Tolkien’s time there. Another Green
Man Inn in Derbyshire, which still exists today, is mentioned in11
“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsman
Boswell’s Life of Johnson (Boswell 751), and even the most cursory
research turns up other inns of that name (past and present) in
Herefordshire, Sussex, Northamptonshire, Lancashire, Staffordshire, Norfolk, Essex, Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, and Kent. Tolkien’s
reasons for abandoning the name are unknown, but it was certainly not because it included the word “Man” in the name for what
was (presumably) an Inn in hobbit-lands, since that word occurred
several times in the original edition of The Hobbit to refer to Bilbo
or the dwarves, not being removed until its appropriateness was
challenged by fellow author Arthur Ransome, several months after
the book’s publication (Return to Bag-End, Appendix IV).
• The third choice, the Green Dragon Inn, which made it into the published book, is no less intriguing. The first story Tolkien ever wrote,
at about the age of six or seven (that is, when he was still living
near Sarehole Mill), was a tale about “a green great dragon.”
Upon being told by his mother that this should be “great green”
instead, Tolkien got so fascinated by this unexpected glimpse of
the deep structure of his own language, with its unarticulated rules
that everyone learns idiomatically without knowing the why behind them, that he abandoned storytelling for more than a decade
and shifted his focus to language itself instead; it may mark the
moment that sparked the awakening of the philologist within. In
any case, it’s striking to note that Tolkien did indeed eventually
write a story about a green dragon, “The Dragon’s Visit,” one
of the “songs of Bimble Bay” series dating from the late 1920s
(probably circa 1928)15—that is, just before he began work on The
Hobbit. And of course like The Green Man, The Green Dragon
is a traditional Inn or tavern name in England; there is a famous
centuries-old pub on the outskirts of Cambridge by that name, as
well as inns and taverns in Gloucestershire, Wensleydale, southeast Wales, Norfolk, and Worcestershire; no less than three inns in
London bore that name at one time or another. And, crossing the
ocean, Boston’s Green Dragon Tavern, which dates back about
three and a half centuries, is famous as one of the gathering spots
of Paul Revere and his fellow Sons of Liberty during the events
leading up to the Revolutionary War.
Both The Green Man and the Green Dragon Inn do have a comic effect the Great Mill would have lacked; through juxtaposition they bring
in a reference to something from the Wild World outside into the heart
of the comfortable settled hobbit country (as the younger Miller says in
The Lord of the Rings, “There’s only one Dragon in Bywater, and that’s
Green”—(FR, I, ii, 53). Tolkien may ultimately have decided that the12
John D. Rateliff
contrast was sharper with a dragon than a wild man and so the quiet joke
would accordingly be more noticable.
Finally, for my third example, I would like to offer a cautionary tale
and look at a case which highlights the perils of over-thinking the mighthave-beens and putting too much emphasis on the story’s drafts at the expense of the book(s) that Tolkien actually produced. Close textual studies
can lead to interesting discoveries, such as the effervescent appearance
of The Green Man this once and only once within Tolkien’s opus, but
the dark side of such work is that it can also be the cause of introducing
errors into the book where there were none before.
For example, in Chapter V of The Lord of the Rings, “A Conspiracy
Unmasked”, Frodo asks Merry “How soon could we get off ?” as he decides whether or not to leave Crickhollow at once for fear of Black Riders
or remain behind hoping Gandalf will show up. Merry replies
“. . . we could get off in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. There are six ponies in a stable across the
fields; stores and tackle are all packed, except for a few extra
clothes, and the perishable food.” (FR, I, v, 117)
Now, this is how the text read from its first publication in 1954 until three
years ago, when it was changed in the Hammond-Scull Fiftieth Anniversary Edition so that Merry now says “There are five ponies in [the] stable.” The reasons for this change go back to Christopher Tolkien’s 1986
edition of the manuscripts for this passage in The Return of the Shadow
(326–327), where he notes that originally all five hobbits present during
this discussion were to enter the Old Forest, and concluded that when
one hobbit was designated to remain behind “this detail was overlooked,
and the six ponies remained at this point” in the text, with the implication that it should have been changed to five ponies instead. This suggestion was taken up by David Bratman in his article “A Corrigenda to The
Lord of the Rings,” which appeared in Christina Scull’s The Tolkien Collector
(March 1994) and attempts to list all known changes that would need to
be made to achieve our best possible approximation to textual perfection. Bratman concedes that some of the “errors” he points out “would
require the author’s intervention” to set right but asserts that ‘some of
these discrepancies, such as the extra pony at [Volume] I [page] 117 . . .
may be corrected with some confidence and precision.” (“Corrigenda”
18–19). Accordingly, the text is indeed changed in the 2004 HammondScull edition (Fiftieth Anniversary Lord of the Rings 107), which is intended
to become the new standard text of the book henceforth.
This reasoning seem solid at first glance, and the credentials of those
who have put this theory forward are impeccable, but as soon as you back
up and look at it from the point of view of the published book rather13
“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsman
than the manuscript drafts the argument falls apart. Here is the sequence
of events in the published work (FR, I, vi, 120): When Frodo does decide
to go by way of the Old Forest, Merry brings the baggage-pony to the
house to load up, then leads it and his fellow hobbits to the stables, where
all five (Frodo, Sam, Merry, Pippin, and Fatty Bolger) mount up and ride
for an hour to the gate in the Hedge separating Buckland from the Old
Forest. Here Fatty says goodbye to them and returns the way he came,
while the rest ride onward with their five ponies (who are later given the
names Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail, Bumpkin, and White-socks by
Tom Bombadil; FR, I, viii, 155). Five ponies entering the Forest, plus one
pony ridden back to Crickhollow by Fatty Bolger, equals six: Tolkien’s
original count was precisely right, and the new revised text introduces an
error by changing it to five.16 The vision of Fatty Bolger jogging alongside
his mounted companions for a solid hour while they rode in comfort is
enough, I think, to refute any argument that he did not have a pony of
his own when he accompanied them to the border of Buckland—especially since Tolkien himself had Tom Bombadil address this very issue
three chapters later, when he provides his own pony (Fatty Lumpkin) in
order to accompany them on their way:
“. . . old Tom’s going to ride . . . he’s coming with you, just to
set you on the road; so he needs a pony. For you cannot easily talk to
hobbits that are riding, when you’re on your own legs trying to trot beside
them.” (FR, I, viii, 156; my emphasis).
And if this is true of the larger, lively, hopping-with-energy Bombadil,
how much more must it be true for the lethargic Fatty Bolger? It is much
more likely that Tolkien got the math right and that Merry was quite
correct in saying that there were six ponies in the stable: the four ridden
by the hobbits who enter the Old Forest, the pack-pony taken with them
into the Forest, and the sixth pony ridden from Crickhollow to the High
Hay and then back again by Fatty Bolger.17
Small details? Of course! But then, as we have already seen, Tolkien
is a writer with whom details matter; they are the individual stones, no
two alike, from which he builds his lighthouses on the Shores of Faerie.
Changing a word here, a phrase there, a reference over yonder, can have
a cascading effect. And while Tolkien’s creation is robust enough to survive such minor changes, I would suggest that it is not the editor’s role
to change a work entrusted to his or her care. Rather, as I see it, it is the
editor’s task to preserve and present the author’s intent as clearly and
accurately as possible.
It is far easier, and more accurate, to avoid all these difficulties by letting Tolkien’s original text stand. Tolkien was unusually fortunate as an
author in that, as the Lord of the Rings galleys at Marquette prove, he had14
John D. Rateliff
almost18 total control over his text, even to the degree that he was able
to insist on favorite spellings of words—something almost unheard of
in publishing, where such matters are determined by house style and inhouse editors think nothing of copyediting a text. Certainly some of his
contemporaries left behind texts riddled with unintended errors—James
Joyce comes to mind19—but this is not, or at least was not, the case with
Tolkien. But that immunity from editorial interference within his own
lifetime has, in recent years, given way to a chimerical quest for a perfect
text, with I think regrettable consequences. Even if we were to assume
the number of ponies is in error, despite evidence to the contrary, we
know from the example of the moon over Lake Town that Tolkien was
aware of “errors” which he chose to preserve in the text. How are we,
not being Tolkien, to know which apparent “errors” he was aware of and
intended to stand? By all means we should correct typos, especially those
which crept in with later printings, but we should always remain wary of
substituting our words for Tolkien’s, and avoid changing the original text
to suit our own ideas about what Tolkien should have said, in the interests
of preserving what he actually did say.
Conclusion: Tolkien the Wordsmith
In the end, what we carry away from a reading of Tolkien’s books is
our delight in the world Tolkien created, and the characters he populated
it with, and the stories he tells of what happens to them. Seventy years
after The Hobbit was published, and more than fifty years since The Lord of
the Rings joined it, and thirty since The Silmarillion completed the triptych
setting forth his fantasy mythology, the appeal of his work is as great as
ever. It has found an ever-widening audience around the world, eager to
share in the insights of other readers who have thought deeply about his
stories and brought different things with them to their readings, different
participations to his sub-creation. With the great medieval authors Tolkien so loved, like the authors of Beowulf and Sir Gawain and the Green Knight,
we are left with only the final product and can only make ill-informed
guesses about how these works were created. We are fortunate beyond
words that a pre-eminent author like Tolkien preserved his manuscripts,
through which we can trace every step of the creative process from first
scribbled lines through the multiple drafts to the final polishing many
thousands of pages later.
NOTES
This paper was originally delivered as the 2007 Blackwelder Lecture
at Marquette University on October 4th, 2007.
1 Cf. Tolkien’s rejection, in “On Fairy-stories,” of those who treat myth15
“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsman
or folklore in generalized or synoptic form, rather than focusing on
the significance of specific stories.
[S]tudents of folk-lore . . . are inclined to say that any two
stories that are built round the same folk-lore motive . . . are
“the same stories.” . . . Statements of that kind may express
(in undue abbreviation) some element of truth; but they are
not true . . . in art or literature. It is precisely the colouring,
the atmosphere, the unclassifiable individual details of a story
. . . that really count. (MC 119)
Among those whose methodology Tolkien rejects here would be Fraser, Frye, Jung, and Campbell.
2 The full passage from Tolkien’s letter to his publisher, with whom he
was already discussing which of several projects would be the best
follow-up to The Hobbit, reads “I must confess that your letter has
aroused in me a faint hope. I mean, I begin to wonder whether duty
and desire may not (perhaps) in future go more closely together. I
have spent nearly all the vacation-times of seventeen years examining, and doing things of that sort, driven by immediate financial
necessity (mainly medical and educational). Writing stories in prose
or verse has been stolen, often guiltily, from time already mortgaged,
and has been broken and ineffective. I may perhaps now do what
I much desire to do, and not fail of financial duty. Perhaps!”(Letters
24).
3 Le Guin’s comment comes in her essay “The Staring Eye,” written as
a tribute at the time of Tolkien’s death, where she mentions reading
the book aloud to each of her children in turn, and observes that “the
nine-year-old likes Merry, but doesn’t much like Pippin. I never could
tell them apart to that extent” (172). By contrast, Marion Zimmer
Bradley, of all people, was more perceptive, giving a detailed contrast
between the two hobbits’ behavior and attitude in “Men, Halflings,
and Hero Worship” (Isaacs and Zimbardo 112).
4 West’s essay, “The Interlace Structure of The Lord of the Rings,” appears in A Tolkien Compass, ed. Jared Lobdell (1975). Jones’s “The
Shape of the Narrative in The Lord of the Rings,” a good essay in a
bad collection, appeared in J.R.R. Tolkien: This Far Land (1983), ed.
Robert Giddings. More recently, Le Guin has drawn attention to the
rhythms of Tolkien’s plotting, alternating dangers with periods of
rest, in “Rhythmic Pattern in The Lord of the Rings,” her contribution
to Meditations on Middle-earth (2001), ed. Karen Haber.16
John D. Rateliff
5 Tolkien’s discussion of his selective use of archaic language to express
nonmodern points of view, particularly in the Rohan sections of The
Lord of the Rings, comes in his draft letter of September 1955 to Hugh
Brogan, who had earlier criticized such usage (Letters 225–226).
6 Medcalf originally made this claim in his Hobbit Workshop presentation at Church House, London, on Saturday May 16th 1987; I quote
him here from my notes taken on that occasion. His presentation has
since been published in rewritten form as the essay “The Language
Learned of Elves” in the 1999 volume of VII, without the offending
phrase but still stressing “his alienation from modern English” (Medcalf 34).
7 That Raffel utterly failed to understand what Tolkien is saying here
is shown by his quoting this very passage and retorting that “ ‘He
climbed a hill and saw a river in the valley below’ does not . . . evoke
any kind of scene at all. It is a cog in some narrative machine: there
was some reason for this person to climb a hill, there was some reason
for him to see a river, and some consequence perhaps flowed therefrom . . . None of this has anything to do with what words as words
can communicate; the question of style is simply not at issue” (Raffel
226–227).
8 Specifically, Tolkien wrote “many confuse ‘applicability’ with ‘allegory’; but the one resides in the freedom of the reader, and the other
in the purposed domination of the author” (FR, Foreword to the Second Edition, 7). Note that for Tolkien the word “allegory” had a very
specific meaning somewhat at odds with the looser usage of some of
those who have written about him; for him, an “allegory” must contain one-on-one correspondences between the fictional characters
and events and the things they represent, like a roman-a-clef. Thus
neither “Leaf by Niggle” nor Smith of Wootton Major is an allegory as
Tolkien would have defined the term.
9 For another example, see a short piece written by Tolkien in 1966
that I call “Notes on a Parley,” which will appear in a future edition
of Return to Bag-End. In it, he devotes several pages to describing the
arrangement of the new wall or barricade Thorin and Company
threw across the Front Gate during the Siege of the Mountain, the
path from there to Ravenhill, and the collapsed bridge over the river
near Dale.
10 Lewis’s method is most straightforwardly described in his essay “It All
Began With A Picture . . .” (1960), collected in On Stories (53–54).17
“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsman
11 I.e., a twist or quirk.
12 In his 1965 BBC radio interview with Denys Gueroult, Tolkien reacts
with pleasure when Gueroult praises his ability to enhance characterization through nomenclature. Although Tolkien describes it as “a
minor technical craft,” he goes on to affirm that he took a great deal
of time and effort over this aspect of his work to achieve his desired
effects.
13 There is a historical irony in this, since it turns out that the original
Sarehole Mill had been converted to industrial uses in the mid-18th
century but had reverted to grinding grain in Tolkien’s time; see John
Ezard, “Tolkien’s Shire” (1991). Preserved through the foresight of
solicitor Arthur Foster (d. 1928), who willed the site to the city on
provision that Mill, meadow, pond, and cottages (including the one
the Tolkiens had lived in) all be preserved, it is now a museum amid
a wilderness preserve (Mosley Bog).
14 Cf. for example Verlyn Flieger’s “The Green Man, The Green
Knight, and Treebeard: Scholarship and Invention in Tolkien’s Fiction” (85–98).
15 I am indebted to Douglas Anderson for establishing, and sharing
with me, the probable date of this sequence (Mr. Baggins 187 Note 12;
and 377 Note 1).
16 Specifically, Tolkien writes that “the five hobbits” entered the stable and
then says that “They mounted, and soon they were riding off. . . .
After riding for about an hour . . . they saw the Hedge looming suddenly ahead” (FR, I, vi, 120; emphasis mine). There is no indication
of any sort that by “they” Tolkien means only four of the five hobbits
present. The natural reading of this passage would be that all five
rode, accompanied by the sixth baggage pony.
17 Hammond and Scull approach the problem from a slightly different
angle in their The Lord of the Rings Companion, claiming that:
Although some readers have tried to explain the reading “six
ponies” by suggesting that one was for Fredegar to ride with
his friends as far as the hedge, Merry is here answering Frodo’s
question about preparations, with details of transport and provisions specifically for the four hobbits who are to make the journey—excluding Fredegar. (118)
In essence, Hammond and Scull here are arguing that while there actually are six ponies present in the stables, Merry should only mention18
John D. Rateliff
five of them since the sixth is not part of his “preparations.” Even
if we grant their argument, this means Merry’s unaltered statement
was in fact accurate—there were six ponies in the stable that night—
while their altered reading must be parsed as meaning something
like “there are five ponies in the stable, plus a sixth one that does not
count and must not be mentioned because it is only going part-way
with us.”
18 “Almost”: the one important change imposed upon Tolkien by his
publisher was the work’s division into three volumes rather than the
large single volume Tolkien would have preferred, a change dictated
by the publisher’s desire to spread their projected financial loss over
three fiscal years. Of course, the book proved to be successful from
the very start, so much so that Allen & Unwin accelerated the release
schedule of the second and third volumes.
19 Not only was Joyce more or less legally blind during the period when
he was trying to proofread Finnegans Wake, but most of his later books
were typeset by men who could not read the language in which they
were written.
WORKS CITED
Anderson, Douglas A. The Annotated Hobbit: Revised and Expanded edition.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2002.
———, and Marjorie Burns, ed. On Tolkien: Interviews, Reminiscences, and
Other Essays. forthcoming.
Bellairs, John. The Face in the Frost. New York: The Macmillan Company,
1969.
Boswell, James. The Life of Samuel Johnson L.L.D. New York: Modern Library, [n.d.]. [Originally published in 1791.]
Bradley, Marion Zimmer. “Men, Halflings, and Hero Worship.” In Tolkien and the Critics: Essays on J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings.
ed. Neil D. Isaacs and Rose A. Zimbardo. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1968. [Originally published in Niekas
1966];
Bratman, David. “A Corrigenda to The Lord of the Rings.” The Tolkien Collector no. 6 (March 1994): 17–27.
Burns, Marjorie. Perilous Realms: Celtic and Norse in Tolkien’s Middle-earth.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2005.19
“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsman
Carpenter, Humphrey. Tolkien: A Biography. Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Company, 1977.
Chance, Jane, ed. Tolkien and the Invention of Myth: A Reader. Lexington:
The University of Kentucky Press, 2004.
———, and Alfred K. Siewers, eds. Tolkien’s Modern Middle Ages. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.
———, ed. Tolkien the Medievalist. London and New York: Routledge,
2003.
Ezard, John. “Tolkien’s Shire,” The Guardian, 28 December 1991.
Flieger, Verlyn. “The Green Man, The Green Knight, and Treebeard:
Scholarship and Invention in Tolkien’s Fiction.” In Scholarship
& Fantasy: Proceedings of The Tolkien Phenomenon, May 1992
Turku, Finland, ed. K. J. Batterbee. Turku, Finland: University
of Turku, 1993.
———. Interrupted Music: The Making of Tolkien’s Mythology. Kent: Kent
State University Press, 2005.
Garth, John. Tolkien and the Great War: The Threshold of Middle-earth. London: HarperCollins, 2003.
Hammond, Wayne G., and Christina Scull. J.R.R. Tolkien: Artist & Illustrator. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1995.
———, ed. The Lord of the Rings Fiftieth Anniversary Edition. London:
HarperCollins; Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2004.
———. The Lord of the Rings: A Reader’s Companion. London: HarperCollins, 2005.
Jones, Diana Wynne. “The Shape of the Narrative in The Lord of the
Rings.” In J.R.R. Tolkien: This Far Land, ed. Robert Giddings. London: Vision Press; Totowa, NJ: Barnes & Noble Books, 1983.
Kilby, Clyde S. Tolkien and The Silmarillion. Wheaton, IL: Harold Shaw,
1976.
Kocher, Paul. Master of Middle-earth: The Fiction of J.R.R. Tolkien. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company, 1972.
Le Guin, Ursula K. “Rhythmic Pattern in The Lord of the Rings.” In Meditations on Middle-earth, ed. Karen Haber. New York: St. Martin’s
Press, 2001: 101-116.20
John D. Rateliff
———. “The Staring Eye.” In The Language of the Night: Essays on Fantasy
and Science Fiction, ed. Susan Wood. New York: G. P. Putnam’s
Sons, 1979: 171-4. [Originally published in Vector no. 66/67
(1974).]
Lewis, C. S. “It All Began With A Picture . . .” In On Stories and Other Essays on Literature, ed. Walter Hooper. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, 1982. [Originally published in Radio Times July 15th
1960.]
———. “The Hobbit.” In On Stories and Other Essays on Literature, ed. Walter Hooper. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1982.
Lewis, Warren H. Brothers and Friends: The Diaries of Major Warren Hamilton
Lewis. ed. Clyde S. Kilby and Marjorie Lamp Mead. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1982.
Medcalf, Stephen. “ ‘The Language Learned of Elves’: Owen Barfield,
The Hobbit, and The Lord of the Rings,” VII: An Anglo-American Literary Review, 16 (1999): 31–53.
Raffel, Burton. “The Lord of the Rings as Literature.” In Tolkien and the
Critics: Essays on “The Lord of the Rings,” ed. Neil D. Issacs and
Rose A. Zimbardo. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame
Press, 1968.
Rateliff, John D. The History of The Hobbit, vol. I: Mr. Baggins. London:
HarperCollins; Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2007.
———. The History of The Hobbit, vol. II: Return to Bag-End. London:
HarperCollins; Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2007.
Rosebury, Brian. [Review of The Lord of the Rings 1954–2004: Scholarship in Honor of Richard E. Blackwelder.] In Tolkien Studies 4 (2007):
282–288.
———. Tolkien: A Critical Assessment. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1992.
Scull, Christina, and Wayne G. Hammond. The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion and Guide. Two volumes. London: HarperCollins; Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company, 2006.
Shippey, Tom. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. London: HarperCollins, 2000.
———. The Road to Middle-earth. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company,
2003.
Thompson, Kristin. The Frodo Franchise: “The Lord of the Rings” and Modern21
“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsman
Hollywood. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007.
Tolkien, J.R.R. Tolkien On Fairy-stories: Expanded Edition. Ed. Verlyn Flieger
and Douglas A. Anderson. London: HarperCollins, 2008.
———. “The Dragon’s Visit.” Oxford Magazine (February 4 1937) 342.
Reprinted in Douglas A. Anderson, The Annotated Hobbit: 309–
311.
West, Richard C. “The Interlace Structure of The Lord of the Rings.” In
A Tolkien Compass, ed. Jared Lobdell. La Salle, IL: Open Court,
1975: 77-94.
Wilson, Edmund. “Oo, Those Awful Orcs.” In The Bit Between My Teeth:
A Literary Chronicle of 1950–1965. New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 1965. [Originally published in The Nation, April 14,
1956.]22
Douglas A. Anderson
John D. Rateliff: A Checklist
COMPILED BY DOUGLAS A. ANDERSON
Books
The History of The Hobbit: Part One: Mr. Baggins
London: HarperCollins, 2007
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2007
London: HarperCollins, 2008 [trade paper]
The History of The Hobbit: Part Two: Return to Bag-End
London: HarperCollins, 2007
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2007
London: HarperCollins, 2008 [trade paper]
[Errata for these books are published at Rateliff ’s website: <www.sacnothscriptorium.com>]
TOLKIEN-RELATED CRITICAL ARTICLES AND REVIEWS
[book review, The Frodo Franchise: The Lord of the Rings and Modern Hollywood (2007), by Kristin Thompson], VII: An Anglo-American Literary Review, 25 (2008): 114-115.
[book review, Tolkien’s Oxford (2008) by Robert S. Blackham], Mythprint,
45 no. 10/11 (whole no. 319/320; October/November 2008):
8-9.
[book review, Tolkien’s Shorter Works (2008), edited by Margaret Hiley and
Frank Weinreich], Tolkien Studies 6 (2009): 302-308.
“ ‘And All the Days of Her Life Are Forgotten’: The Lord of the Rings as
Mythic Prehistory.” In The Lord of the Rings 1954-2004: Scholarship in Honor of Richard E. Blackwelder, ed. Wayne G. Hammond
and Christina Scull. Milwaukee, Wisconsin: Marquette University Press, 2006: 67-100.
“ ‘And Something Yet Remains to Be Said’: Tolkien and Williams,” Mythlore, vol. 12 no. 3 (whole number 45; Spring 1986): 48-54.
“Early Versions of Farmer Giles of Ham.” In Leaves from the Tree: J.R.R.
Tolkien’s Shorter Fiction, by T. A. Shippey, et al. London: Tolkien
Society, 1991: 45-48.
“ ‘Fastiticalon’ and ‘Cat’: A Problem in Sequencing,” Beyond Bree, August23
John Rateliff: A Checklist
1987: 1-2 [co-written with Wayne G. Hammond].
“Gríma the Wormtongue: Tolkien and His Sources,” Mallorn, no. 25
(September 1988): 15-17.
“J.R.R. Tolkien: ‘Sir Topas’ Revisited,” Notes and Queries, n.s. vol. 29 no.
4 (August 1982): 348.
“ ‘A Kind of Elvish Craft’: Tolkien as Literary Craftsman,” Tolkien Studies
6 (2009): 1-21.
“The Lost Road, The Dark Tower, and The Notion Club Papers: Tolkien and
Lewis’s Time Travel Triad.” In Tolkien’s Legendarium: Essays on
The History of Middle-earth, ed. Verlyn Flieger and Carl F. Hostetter. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2000: 199-218.
“She and Tolkien,” Mythlore, 8 no. 2 (whole number 28; Summer 1981):
6-8.
“Tolkien for the Masses” [review of Bill Green, Tolkien: Master of Fantasy
(1981)], Mythlore, 14 no. 1 (whole number 51; Autumn 1987):
49-50.
SELECTED OTHER CRITICISM
[book review, And God Came In: The Extraordinary Story of Joy Davidman; Her
Life and Marriage to C. S. Lewis (1983), by Lyle W. Dorsett], Christianity & Literature, 33 no. 3 (Spring 1984): 71-73.
[book review, Owen Barfield: Romanticism Comes of Age: A Biography (2006),
by Simon Blaxland-de Lange], Mythlore, 27 nos. 1/2 (whole
number 103/104; Fall/Winter 2008): 161-164.
[book review, Past Watchful Dragons: Fantasy and Faith in the World of C.
S. Lewis (2007), ed. by Amy H. Sturgis], Mythlore, 26 nos. 3/4
(whole number 101/102; Spring/Summer 2008): 212-215.
“Dragons of Legend,” Dragon Magazine, 21 no. 1 (whole no. 230; June
1996): 24-28.
“Introduction,” in Eager Spring, by Owen Barfield. [no place]: Barfield
Press UK, 2008: ix-xiii.
“The Kathryn Lindskoog Hoax” [review of The C. S. Lewis Hoax (1988)
by Kathryn Lindskoog], Mythlore, 13 no. 4 (whole number 58;
Summer 1989): 53-56.
“Owen Barfield: A Short Reading List,” in C. S. Lewis, Owen Barfield: A
Souvenir Book for the Centenary Celebration Held at Wheaton, Illinois24
Douglas A. Anderson
July 15-20, 1998 by the Mythopoeic Society. Williamstown, MA:
McClelland Press, 1998: 22-25.
“Rhetorical Strategies in Charles William’s Prose Play,” in The Rhetoric of
Vision: Essays on Charles Williams, ed. Charles A. Huttar and Peter J. Schakel. Lewisburg, PA: Bucknell University Press, 1996:
238-247.
SELECTED ONLINE CRITICISM
(URLs current as of January 2009):
[movie reviews of the three parts Peter Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings: The
Fellowship of the Rings (December 2002); The Two Towers (December 2003);
The Return of the King (December 2004)] Wizards of the Coast website
<www.wizards.com>:
The Fellowship of the Ring (2001), three parts:
<http://www.wizards.com/dnd/article.asp?x=dnd/dx20020111x>
<http://www.wizards.com/dnd/article.asp?x=dnd/dx20020118x>
<http://www.wizards.com/dnd/article.asp?x=dnd/dx20020125x>
The Two Towers (2002), two parts:
<http://www.wizards.com/dnd/article.asp?x=dnd/dx20030117x>
<http://www.wizards.com/dnd/article.asp?x=dnd/dx20030124x>
The Return of the King (2003), two parts:
<http://www.wizards.com/default.asp?x=dnd/dnd/20040118a>
<http://www.wizards.com/default.asp?x=dnd/dnd/20040125a>
Classics of Fantasy, monthly online column, August 2002 through January
2004. Wizards of the Coast website <www.wizards.com>:
I (August 2002). Williams Morris, The Well at the World’s End (1896)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/Books/Wizards/?doc=dnd_classics>
II (September 2002). Patricia A. McKillip, The Forgotten Beasts of Eld (1974)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classics2>
III (October 2002). M. R. James, Ghost Stories of an Antiquarian (1904 ff.)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
ghoststories>
IV (November 2002). Fritz Leiber, Swords Against Death (1970)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classicsoffantasy>25
John Rateliff: A Checklist
V (December 2002). John Myers Myers, Silverlock (1949)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
silverlock>
VI (January 2003). David Lindsay, A Voyage to Arcturus (1920)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classics3>
VII (February 2003). Barry Hughart, The Bridge of Birds (1984)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classics8>
VIII (March 2003). E. R. Eddison, The Worm Ouroboros (1922)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classicworm>
IX (April 2003). H. P. Lovecraft, The Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath (1926)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classicsdreamquest>
X (May 2003). Ursula K. Le Guin, A Wizard of Earthsea (1968)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classicswizardearthsea>
XI (June 2003). John Bellairs, The Face in the Frost (1969)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classicsfacefrost>
XII (July 2003). William Hope Hodgson, The Night Land (1912)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classicsnightland>
XIII (August 2003). Richard Adams, Watership Down (1972)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classicswatership>
XIV (September 2003). Kenneth Morris, The Book of Three Dragons (1930)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classicsbook3dragons>
XV (October 2003). Clark Ashton Smith, Tales of Averoigne (1929 ff.)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classicsaveroigne>
XVI (November 2003). Lord Dunsany,The Books of Wonder(1910, 1912, 1916)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classicsdunsany>26
Douglas A. Anderson
XVII (December 2003). J.R.R. Tolkien, The Hobbit (1937)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classicshobbit>
XVIII (January 2004). Katharine Briggs, Hobberty Dick (1955)
<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_
classicshobberdy>27
Copyright © West Virginia University Press
Talk to the Dragon: Tolkien as Translator
ÁRMANN JAKOBSSON
In chapter 12 of Smaug, the object of his and his companions’ quest. This encounter The Hobbit, Bilbo Baggins finally meets the dragon
with the dragon is in a sense both the climax and the anti-climax of
the story. It is also a turning point, both structurally and morally. The
story has up to this point been episodic in structure, a travel narrative
with each adventure coming on top of the previous one, as Bilbo and
the dwarves travel to The Lonely Mountain (Erebor). It has also been
morally simple for the most part, with Bilbo and his companions as unambiguous protagonists, facing various kinds of evils (goblins, wolves,
spiders and hostile elves). After the meeting with the dragon, however,
the narrative becomes more unexpected, entangled, ambiguous, and political, culminating in the hostile encounter between Bilbo’s companions
and the elves and men of Lake Town (Esgaroth), and Bilbo’s subsequent
betrayal of his dwarf friends.1
In this article, I will analyze the encounter between Bilbo and Smaug,
trying to come closer to the identity and the origins of the dragon. I will
show how Tolkien is acting as a translator of a kind, by which I mean that
he is using Old Norse sources not only as an inspiration for this scene,
but that he also gathers a subtext from them, making his dragon much
more ambiguous and still more frightening a brutish beast. I will argue
that Smaug the dragon might be regarded as an uncanny monster and
that this uncanny aspect of the dragon is present not only in The Hobbit
but also in its major source, the Old Norse poem Fáfnismál. Thus Tolkien
is acting as a translator not only of motifs but also of ideas, and even of
eerie feelings.2
When Bilbo, and the readers of The Hobbit, are confronted with the
dragon, they are in for a surprise, as Smaug’s behaviour is somewhat unusual for a dragon. Dragons are an ancient and fairly ubiquitous cultural
phenomenon, the origins of which are extremely hard to trace.3 Tolkien
clearly expected his readers to be a little familiar with dragons: various
statements made in the book suggest that he is addressing an audience
with some previous knowledge of said species, in theory if not practice.4
This ideal audience would not have been surprised to see Tolkien’s dragon as depicted in the book: a huge, scaly, fire-breathing, flying monstrosity, resting on its treasure.5 This is what a dragon should be like, and in
four out of the five times that Tolkien’s dragon appears it behaves more
or less as a ‘generic’ dragon might be expected to, wrecking things without giving much thought to it. If anything, the dragon is pleased about28
Ármann Jakobsson
the destruction it wreaks, which is unsurprising, since dragons are evil
monsters and being dangerous and destructive is their role. And Smaug,
the dragon in The Hobbit, lives up to this expectation. He turns out to be
as bestial and as monstrous as the best of dragons.
Evil monster he is indeed, but how? It is the fifth scene, in which
my interest lies, the one where Tolkien’s dragon might be said to defy
expectations. Initially, the dragon is mentioned as the main antagonist
of the dwarves visiting Bilbo Baggins, as the object of their quest and
as a destroyer and killer whose death they desire. The actual encounter
with the dragon keeps being postponed as the quest proceeds, with trolls
and goblins and wolves and spiders and elves—but no dragons, until the
story is well advanced. Then, finally, Bilbo Baggins has to walk into the
dragon’s lair (happily invisible, though) and steal something from it, only
to bring the dragon’s wrath upon himself and the dwarves, who all nevertheless escape from it—the dragon eats their ponies instead.6 And it is
at that point in the narrative that Bilbo is again sent to face the dragon.
This time, it is awake and it speaks—and I will now have to stop referring
to the dragon as “it,” since he has started speaking.
When the dragon starts to speak, the reader cannot escape the feeling
that this is a climactic event which turns the expected storyline upside
down:
Smaug certainly looked fast asleep, almost dead and dark,
with scarcely a snore more than a whiff of unseen steam,
when Bilbo peeped once more from the entrance. He was
just about to step out on to the floor when he caught a sudden thin and piercing ray of red from under the drooping
lid of Smaug’s left eye. He was only pretending to sleep! He
was watching the tunnel entrance! Hurriedly Bilbo stepped
back and blessed the luck of his ring. Then Smaug spoke.
(H, XII, 211–12)
Readers are probably expected to be a bit taken back by the words “Then
Smaug spoke”, at the end of this paragraph—they are, as it were, much
like a punch-line (or surprise) of an Elizabethan sonnet.
It seems likely that many readers of The Hobbit would start out regarding dragons as belonging to the animal kingdom, mythical to be
sure, but beasts nonetheless. Tolkien’s dragon, on the other hand, is not a
beast. The moment it speaks, it becomes a character, an intelligent person who is not merely governed by his bestial instincts. The dragon still
retains these bestial instincts, though. Indeed he soon refers to his having
feasted on dwarves (his exact words are: “I know the smell (and taste) of
dwarf—no one better” (H, XII, 213)—which is tantamount to cannibalism, since dwarves are also intelligent and speaking creatures.7 Thus,29
Talk to the Dragon: Tolkien as Translator
Tolkien’s dragon is actually a hybrid: part man, part beast, a chimera or a
finngálkn in Old Norse.8 Still, in spite of his wildness, the dragon turns out
to be quite a conversationalist: curious, polite, clever, and subtle.
When dragons start to talk, they are transposed into the world of humans, of those who possess the ability to speak and to converse. And for a
conversation to take place, the two (or more) people involved need some
common ground. Most importantly, they need a common language (and,
perhaps surprisingly but probably mainly for the sake of the storyline,
dragons and hobbits share a language in The Hobbit); secondly, they need
some common points of reference. And these turn out to be possible for
Bilbo and the dragon when they meet for the second time and start talking to each other.
It is not so much the fact that the dragon speaks that makes Bilbo’s
conversation with dragon surprising but how he speaks: the dragon is
clever and subtle and formidable in an eerie way. This opens up a Pandora’s Box of new and uncanny possibilities: is the dragon perhaps human
in some way? Is he, heaven forbid, one of us?
While Tolkien was writing The Hobbit, he also composed his famous
essay “Beowulf: The Monsters and the Critics” (the Israel Gollancz lecture of 1936), and he was, very rarely for a serious scholar of that age,
quite preoccupied with monsters (as his essay bears witness, most would
have considered monsters folkloristic and frivolous). Unlike most of the
critics of Beowulf, Tolkien liked the hero’s monster battles, arguing that
the inhumanity of the antagonists (and their more elemental nature) is
not just a plebeian descent into folktales belonging in the nursery, but a
device which made the story larger and more significant.
In this lecture, Tolkien also ponders the relationship between monstrosity and otherness, a very common preoccupation in modern monster
studies.9 To simplify, we can distinguish between two types of monsters,
which are exemplified in Beowulf by the dragon that Beowulf dies fighting and by Grendel and his mother, the monstrous antagonists in the first
part of the poem.
There is, on one hand, the monster which is the complete Other,
as one might initially regard the Beowulfian dragon. A giant tarantula
would fit into this category, as would Godzilla and perhaps the Alien
from Ridley Scott’s influential film of the same name. No affinity between
man and monster seems possible.10 The other type is the monster as our
double, human monsters, such as Grendel. Robert Louis Stevenson’s Mr
Hyde is the obvious example but all speaking monsters belong in some
way to this category.11 The same would seem to apply to shapeshifters, a
well-known category of medieval monsters, which includes werewolves
and, perhaps, berserkers.12
A dragon such as Smaug is an interesting case in point. At first sight,30
Ármann Jakobsson
it (and in this context we have to refer to Smaug as “it”) seems to belong
in the category of the monstrous Other, that set of monsters who are
completely and utterly alien to us.13 Of course, dragons would initially
seem to belong to the utterly alien, and it is easy to argue why, since
dragons do not resemble humans in the slightest: they are slithery, flying,
fire-breathing serpents. From the modern biological point of view, humans and serpents are not even slightly related—the actual relationship
between the two is considerably weaker than that which exists, say, between humans and apes, while in the Northern Middle Ages it was usually bears and wolves that were seen as somehow akin to the human race.
Still, there are also Old Norse cases of humans and serpents belonging to
the same family, including most notoriously the originally human dragon
Fáfnir, whom I will discuss below.
When Tolkien’s dragon starts to speak, it has moved, perhaps unexpectedly, into the other category, the monster as our double.14 Smaug
then becomes Mr. Hyde, Dracula, Frankenstein’s monster—all these
well-known figures of the popular culture of the 1930’s, to which Tolkien, whether he would have seen it that way or not, also belongs.15 Tolkien is doing new things with the concept of the dragon. He is, in a way,
neutralizing the opposition between the human and the monstrous, or, at
least, moving the dragon between categories, using it to reflect something
that can also be found in humans.16
As scholars have noted, the notion of the talking dragon comes from
the poem Fáfnismál, as well as from Völsunga saga where Fáfnismál is used
as a source.17 This is hardly surprising, since Tolkien himself actually says
in The Monsters and the Critics that “dragons, real dragons, essential both to
the machinery and the ideas of a poem or tale, are actually rare. In the
northern literature there are only two that are significant. . . . we have but
the dragon of the Volsungs, Fafnir, and Beowulf ’s bane” (MC 11).18
The clue is almost superfluous: for anyone who knows both The Hobbit and Fáfnismál, the conversation between the hero and the dragon in
the former is obviously modelled on and inspired by the latter.19 As an
extension of this observation, I will argue that the uncanny aspects of the
monster Smaug, how it is familiar and unfamiliar at the same time, 20 are
also present in Fáfnismál and that Tolkien is, as it were, translating them
to suit the needs of a modern novel.
Fáfnismál is a part of the story of the dragonslayer Sigurðr in the
Poetic Edda. Sigurðr killed the mighty dragon Fáfnir, but, as the Eddic
poems are for the most part more interested in conversations than deeds,
this is not really the main subject of the poem, which instead focuses on
Sigurðr’s conversation with the dying dragon. Fáfnismál, even in comparison with other Eddic poems, is obscure to the point of being completely
baffling. For example, Sigurðr starts off by cleverly concealing his name31
Talk to the Dragon: Tolkien as Translator
(calling himself “gfvgt dyr” [a noble animal]), only to reveal it unnecessarily a little later.21
Throughout the poem, readers will be prone to get an eerie feeling
that the dragon is somehow outwitting Sigurðr, as Smaug also outwits
Bilbo in The Hobbit, or at least thinks he does, even though the hobbit
certainly has the last laugh. In Fáfnismál, the dragon certainly has the upper hand in the beginning. Though in his dying throes, he asks aggressive
and clever questions, mostly attempting to wrest out of the young hero
the identity of the man who he thinks has put him up to this (the dragon’s
own brother Reginn), whilst warning him against the curse of the gold.
The dragon’s last words are that if Sigurðr is not careful, they will both
end up being killed by the same man. That would entail a strange sharing of fate for the dragon and his slayer, but, as the myth of Fáfnismál has
it, they do have a lot in common: not just Reginn, but the gold and the
violence by which they live. Fáfnir was, according to the Eddas, originally
a human who was transformed into a dragon to keep his gold safe. Thus
in Fáfnismál we do not have a dragon as a complete Other. In fact, the
dragon and the hero might be said to share a curious affinity with each
other, even a family relationship, since they both have an intimate connection with Reginn.22
Tolkien, when writing his narrative of the encounter with the dragon,
is, in a sense, acting as translator. He is not translating Fáfnismál directly
to English,23 but he is translating its essence for inclusion in a modern
novel (and for all its medieval learning The Hobbit is quite modern and
was arguably ahead of its time in 1937).24 His dragon, although its human origins remain unspecified, is strangely and unnervingly human,
like Fáfnir. And Bilbo, faced with the daunting experience of having his
first talk with a dragon, resorts to the same methods as Sigurðr does, that
is speaking in riddles. Clearly humorously alluding to Fáfnismál, the narrator applauds Bilbo’s decision to speak in riddles: “This of course is the
way to talk to a dragon, if you don’t want to reveal your proper name
(which is wise) and don’t want to infuriate them by a flat refusal (which is
also very wise). No dragon can resist the fascination of riddling talk and
of wasting time trying to understand it” (H, XII, 213).
While Bilbo does a slightly better job with the riddles than Sigurðr,
he still unintentionally reveals some things to the clever dragon that he
did not want to, who realizes from one of the riddle-names Bilbo invents
for himself that he has received the hospitality of the people of the lake
town Esgaroth.
The conversation actually gets close to comical at one point when
Bilbo becomes lofty in his riddle-making, while the dragon keeps interrupting him with down-to-earth remarks, much in the way of a gruff
school-teacher, or King Haraldr hard-ruler during the first performance32
Ármann Jakobsson
of Magnússdrápa hrynhenda.25 One example:
“I come from under the hill, and under the hills and over
the hills my paths led. And through the air, I am he that
walks unseen.”
“So I can well believe,” said Smaug, “but that is hardly
your usual name.”
“I am the clue-finder, the web-cutter, the stinging fly. I
was chosen for the lucky number.”
“Lovely titles!” sneered the dragon. “But lucky numbers
don’t always come off.” (H, XII, 212)
Bilbo is obviously trying to impress the dragon, as a young man might
wish to impress a paternal figure, whereas one cannot really imagine oneself trying to impress Godzilla.26
Both Bilbo and Sigurðr run into trouble because their dragons are
slippery, their answers unexpected and both gently goad their heroes
into revealing more: Smaug by snorting “lovely titles!”—whereas when
Sigurðr claims to be both motherless and fatherless, it is Fáfnir’s turn to
snort: “af hverio vartv vndri alinn” [what wonder begat you?] (stanza
3).27 Both dragons also warn the hero about the treachery of his comrades. And, as The Hobbit has it, Bilbo was in dire risk of falling under the
dragon’s spell (H, XII, 214).
The subtext about parentage in Fáfnismál aids in rendering the dragon no simple monster.28 It is no coincidence that the dragon begins by
asking about Sigurðr’s parents, since Sigurðr has actually been brought
to Gnitaheiði by his foster-father and mentor, Reginn, who is the brother
of the dragon Fáfnir. As Reginn’s brother, Fáfnir easily becomes a surrogate parent to Sigurðr as well, and their conversation bears witness to
it: this dragon is not merely a monster in the wilderness. He is a teacher,
a respectable figure, and he also has magical powers.29 He is a thing of
sorcery and that means that he is terrible. The dragon-spell is not only a
gimmick that the dragon possesses to make him a more formidable adversary. It also reminds us that there is in the hearts of others (certainly in
the hearts of the dwarves, and, as it turns out, also in the heart of Bilbo) a
tiny essence of the dragon, that draconitas which made it possible for Fáfnir to turn himself into a dragon.30 As Jonathan Evans has remarked, the
main function of the dragon in the Old Germanic world was as a legendary or even mythic symbol of greed,31 and in The Hobbit we have a good
example of this in the tragic fate of the master of Esgaroth who dies from
“dragon-sickness” in the epilogue of the narrative (H, XIX, 285).
There is one major difference between the two protagonists. Bilbo is
afraid, as described shortly before he meets the dragon: “It was at this
point that Bilbo stopped. Going on from there was the bravest thing he33
Talk to the Dragon: Tolkien as Translator
ever did. The tremendous things that happened afterward were as nothing compared to it. He fought the real battle in the tunnel alone, before
he ever saw the vast danger that lay in wait” (H, XII, 205). Bilbo’s passage through the tunnel is loaded with symbolic meaning, as everyone
would recognize in our post-Freudian age.32 We do not even really need
to be inspired by Freud to see the tunnel as an image of birth: in the tunnel, Bilbo is born as a hero. What does he then meet in the bright world
beyond? He enters the lair of the dragon, the brightness of which is explained by the treasure, and encounters a big strangely familiar creature
that is intimidating and whose motives are unclear.
This Freudian birth imagery is connected to the idea that the dragon
may become a somewhat twisted paternal figure to the hero, not only
in Fáfnismál, where the dragon is actually the brother of Sigurðr’s father-figure Reginn, but also in The Hobbit. One way for a budding hero
to become a man is slaying a dragon, as Sigurðr Fáfnisbani does (and
Ragnar, the hero of Ragnars saga loðbrókar as well), an idea that Tolkien
must mainly have gathered from Fáfnismál. It clearly has an added significance that Fáfnismál starts with Fáfnir asking his slayer about his birth.
He wants to know not who Sigurðr is, but whose son he is. And after
that, Sigurðr and Fáfnir spend the first five stanzas of the poem repeating the words “father” and “son”. They go on to discuss the curse of the
gold and Sigurðr’s eventual death. Sigurður seems somewhat at a loss as
to how to acquit himself when conversing with dragons throughout the
dialogue with Fáfnir, but he still wants to gain wisdom from this wise old
creature.33 The first thing he asks him is about the origins of the norns
who “kjósa mǫþr fra mgum” [sunder mother and son] (stanza 12).34
Birth, fatherhood, motherhood and death seem to be foremost in Sigurðr’s mind when faced with the dragon.
Curiously, Bilbo too when he confronts the dragon, starts thinking
about his own father, who is otherwise a shadowy figure in The Hobbit,
and, indeed, in The Lord of the Rings: “Perhaps something will turn up.
‘Every worm has his weak spot, as my father used to say’” (H, XII, p.
211). By remembering things that his father told him, he finds the weak
spot on the dragon’s belly, making his father a part of his confrontation with the dragon. In The Hobbit, the dragon is certainly not such a
palpable father figure as Fáfnir is in Fáfnismál, but I would contend that
the subtext is still there, as is evident in the passage quoted above where
Bilbo’s riddling talk is tested by the dragon. From Fáfnismál Smaug carries
with him some of the aura of an evil ancestor, familiar and unfamiliar at
the same time, and his uncanny status in the conflict owes something to
this “ancestry” of the text The Hobbit as a “translation” of Fáfnismál. Were
it not for the ambiguous and perversely paternal role Smaug has, Bilbo
might not have needed to bring his biological father into the lair with him34
Ármann Jakobsson
to confront this antagonist.
The parental role of the dragon is less overt in The Hobbit than in
Fáfnismál and it is important to keep in mind that the dialogue between
the two dragons and their antagonists also differs in many other respects.
Even so, one might still say that Tolkien has picked up themes and even
an uncanny atmosphere from Fáfnismál and thus translated the old poem
into a narrative fit for his own tale.
The most important thing that Tolkien gained from Fáfnismál is that
the conversation between the dragon and the hero and the intellectual
game they play moves the dragon from one monster category to the
other. The dragon is no longer merely terrible and bestial, he now also
becomes uncanny, strange and yet familiar, human and yet not human,
acting almost as if he is Bilbo’s parent and teacher and not merely a
monster in the wilderness. An uncanny relationship is thus established
between the hero and the dragon. The duel with the monster becomes a
duel of wits, an idea not perhaps central to the Sigurðr myth as such but
certainly central to Fáfnismál.
Tolkien is translating not only the conversation between budding
hero and dragon from the Old Norse, but also that dialogue’s alarming
sub-text. Tolkien’s dragon becomes both monstrous and uncanny. His
intelligence and his command of language, his strange familiarity, makes
his appetite for dwarves, his cannibalism as it were, seem more eerie and
more subtly frightening. This monster is not just terrifying, it is a part
of us. We can talk to it because there is a revolting but real connection
between man and monster.
NOTES
This article was originally written as a paper for the International Mediaeval Conference in Leeds and presented in a session organized by Carl
Phelpstead (with him and Dimitra Fini as the other speakers) in July
2007.
1 Tolkien wrote The Hobbit in two stages and the last part of the novel
only after having been approached by publishers (Carpenter 183–84;
this has been challenged by Rateliff I, xi–xviii). I have argued previously (Tolkien og Hringurinn, 41–42) that this part of the narrative
completely transforms the book, as it enhances both its structural
complexity and its irony, as the fight at one point suddenly is not between good and evil anymore but rather between various factions of
the good races; see also Shippey (Road 76).
2 I am treading the path of recent monster theory (Cohen 4) by
examining the monster both as a construct and a projection. The35
Talk to the Dragon: Tolkien as Translator
idea of Tolkien as a ‘translator’ in a sense pervades the work of T.A.
Shippey (see esp. Road) as well.
3 The most extensive study of Indo-European dragon slaying myths is
Watkins, (esp. 297–303).
4 E.g. “If you have ever seen a dragon in a pinch you will realise that
this was only poetical exaggeration applied to any hobbit” (H, I, 27);
“Dragons steal gold and jewels, you know” (H, I, 32); “dragons must
sleep sometimes, I suppose” (H, I, 35).
5 Smaug is described in H, xii, 205–6 and again on page 212–16.
6 This probably seems rather wicked to most readers, except Icelanders, who have been eating ponies for centuries.
7 This would depend on how cannibalism is defined. On the one hand,
dragons and dwarves do not belong to the same species. On the other,
one sapient (talking) animal eating another violates the same norms
that cannibalism does, as C. S. Lewis, Tolkien’s friend and ally, suggests in The Silver Chair (113).
8 On this Icelandic monster type and its metaphorical use, see Einar
Sigmarsson.
9 See e.g.: “Triumph over the lesser and more nearly human is cancelled by defeat before the older and more elemental” (MC 34).
10 Many monsters of popular culture seem at first to belong to this type,
although perhaps wrongly, with King Kong as a good example (one
may keep in mind that the famous 1933 film is contemporary to the
The Hobbit).
11 Tolkien’s Orcs are a good example, however deformed they are made
to look by the film make-up artists.
12 This category of human monsters would also seem to incorporate
the Old Norse giants, who are not only the gods’ main antagonists
but also their ancestors and relations by marriage, see e.g. Jakobsson
(“Contest”).
13 And yet, as Samantha Riches has recently reminded us, animals in
literature are never wholly similar to and never entirely different from
humans (199).
14 Tolkien preferred not to think of dragons as animals (“as a sober
zoologist,” as he phrases it himself) (MC 11).
15 On the monster culture of the 1930s, see Skal (esp. 113–209).36
Ármann Jakobsson
16 On Tolkien’s recurrent interest in dragons, see Rateliff (II, 525–34).
He later created a second and very different dragon, Chrysophylax
Dives, a character in Farmer Giles of Ham (published 1949, but actually
written in 1937, in the midst of Tolkien’s preoccupation with dragons). Chrysophylax is in some ways even more human than Smaug,
although he retains some bestial qualities.
17 See e.g. Shippey (Road, 82; Author, 36).
18 This is a hyperbole, as demonstrated by Evans (221) but Tolkien is
not entirely wrong; these are the two most important dragon characters from Old Germanic culture and undoubtedly the ones that
he used when creating Smaug. Only Fáfnir in Fáfnismál speaks, but
the Beowulf dragon may also be said to possess a somewhat human
personality; when its cup has been stolen, it does not only scour the
vicinity, searching for the thief, it also goes to its treasure mound to
see if it has not simply mislaid it.
19 I am not suggesting that Fáfnismál is the only model for Ch. 12 of The
Hobbit; other influences have also been noted but are of less interest
to this study.
20 In his 1919 essay, Freud defines the uncanny as that which is familiar and yet strange, thus frightening (CPW XVII, 220). As Royle has
recently shown, Freud’s depiction of the uncanny is complex and
full of ambiguities, but this simple definition will have to do for our
purposes.
21 Norrœn fornkvæði (219–20).
22 Fáfnismál is in itself a very complex narrative and it is also a part of a
complex narrative cycle where the most complicated part is the moment between the dragon-slaying and the double marriages that later
take place between Sigurðr, Brynhildr, Guðrún and Gunnarr (see e.g.
Andersson).
23 In the same way, he is not directly translating Beowulf when he borrows from it theft of the golden cup for The Hobbit (and Tolkien somewhat disingenuously denied having been thinking of Beowulf at all
when he wrote that scene, see Letters [31]).
24 Its lack of a preaching tone is comparable to the contemporary works
of Enid Blyton who became somewhat unfairly notorious for adopting her audience’s point of view. For good arguments as to how Tolkien is very much a twentieth century novelist, see Rosebury (147–57)
and Shippey (Author, 310–18).37
Talk to the Dragon: Tolkien as Translator
25 Morkinskinna, (116–18).
26 Shippey has also remarked that the “familiarity” of Smaug’s speech
suggests an unsettling connection between man and monsters (Road,
84).
27 Norrœn fornkvæði (220).
28 Evans has noted that the motif of the dragon as a transformed man
serves to ambiguate the categorial binarism of the opposition between man and monster and thus it is also possible to see the hero
and the dragon as “doubles” (250–56; see also Lionarons).
29 As Tom Shippey has noted the dragon’s speech has echoes of the
“aggressive politeness of the British upper class” (Road, 83; Author,
37–38).
30 This is suggested already in the first chapter by his reaction to the
song of the dwarves (H, I, 25).
31 Evans (263). He also discusses monstrous transformations of greed in
depth in his excellent study of the Old Germanic dragon (248–61).
32 As Freud explains (CPW V, 397), he is not claiming any originality in
spotting these symbols; he expects e.g. narrow passages and closed
doors to be recognized as well-known or obvious symbols for the vagina. Even though Freud and Tolkien were far removed from each
other as scholars, it is not unlikely that Tolkien was at least aware of
the possibility of such an interpretation.
33 Cf. Evans (265).
34 Norrœn fornkvæði (221).
WORKS CITED
Andersson, Theodore M. The Legend of Brynhild. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 1980.
Carpenter, Humphrey. J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography. London: Unwin, 1977
[repr. 1989].
Cohen, Jeffrey Jerome. “Monster Culture (Seven Theses).” In Monster
Theory: Reading Culture. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1996: 3–25.
Einar Sigmarsson. “Hamskipti eða endaskipti?: Um nykur og nykrað,
finngálkn og finngálknað.” Gripla 16 (2005): 287–98.38
Ármann Jakobsson
Evans, Jonathan. “As Rare As They are Dire: Old Norse Dragons, Beowulf, and the Deutsche Mythologie.” In The Shadow-Walkers:
Jacob Grimm’s Mythology of the Monstrous, ed. Tom Shippey. Tempe, AZ: Arizona Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies,
2005: 207–69.
Freud, Sigmund. The Complete Psychological Works V, ed. by James Strachey,
Anna Freud, Alix Strachey and Alan Tyson. London: Hogarth,
1953 [repr. 1973].
———. The Complete Psychological Works XVII, ed. by James Strachey,
Anna Freud, Alix Strachey and Alan Tyson. London: Hogarth,
1955 [repr. 1973].
Jakobsson, Ármann. Tolkien og Hringurinn. Reykjavík: Forlagið, 2003.
———. “A Contest of Cosmic Fathers: God and Giant in Vafþrúðnismál.”
Neophilologus 92 (2008): 263–77.
Lewis, C. S. The Silver Chair. Glasgow: Fontana Lions, 1980.
Lionarons, Joyce Tally. “Beowulf: Myth and Monsters.” English Studies 77
(1996): 1–14.
Morkinskinna, ed. Finnur Jónsson. Copenhagen: Samfund til Udgivelse af
Gammel Nordisk Litteratur, 1932.
Norrœn fornkvæði, ed. Sophus Bugge. Oslo: Universitetsforlaget, 1867 [repr.
1965].
Rateliff, John D. The History of the Hobbit I–II. London: Harper Collins,
2007.
Riches, Samantha E.J. “Encountering the Monstrous: Saints and Dragons in Medieval Thought.” In The Monstrous Middle Ages, ed. Bettina Bildhauer and Robert Mills. Cardiff: University of Wales
Press, 2003: 196–218.
Rosebury, Brian. Tolkien: A Cultural Phenomenon. Basingstoke: Palgrave,
2003.
Royle, Nicholas. The Uncanny. Manchester: Manchester University Press,
2003.
Shippey, Tom. The Road to Middle-earth. 2nd edition. London: Grafton,
1992.
———. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. London: Harper Collins,
2000.39
Talk to the Dragon: Tolkien as Translator
Skal, David J. The Monster Show: A Cultural History of Horror. London: Plexus, 1993.
Watkins, Calvert. How to Kill a Dragon: Aspects of Indo-European Poetics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995.41
Copyright © West Virginia University Press
A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division
of Lit. and Lang.
JILL FITZGERALD
In 1931, Tolkien delivered a lecture to the Philological Society of Ox ford titled, “Chaucer as a Philologist: The Reeve’s Tale,” which was sub- -
sequently published in 1934 and recently reprinted by Tolkien Studies in
2008.1 This paper hopes to complement that reprint by setting Tolkien’s
lecture within his professional context at the time of its delivery and, additionally, by examining the role Chaucer played in Tolkien’s scholarly
and creative works. Tolkien’s essay “Chaucer as a Philologist” is perhaps
the most comprehensive account of the dialectic variations in The Reeve’s
Tale to date. Beneath its detailed surface argument, it is also a tonguein-cheek attempt by Tolkien to convince his audience (and certainly his
skeptics) that Chaucer was philologically savvy, and would have felt right
at home within the Oxford “language school.” A year before delivering
this lecture Tolkien had weighed in on the long-standing pedagogical
dispute between the programs known as “Lit.” and “Lang.” in an article for The Oxford Magazine. He wrote: “In the English School, owing
to the accidents of history, the distinction between philology and literature is notoriously marked . . . its branches are customarily but loosely
dubbed the ‘language’ and ‘literature’ side—titles which never were accurate, fortunately for both. History may explain their arising, but provides no defence for their retention” (778). As Tolkien implies, this debate
had its roots in the Oxford English Department’s fledgling years during
the nineteenth century, and continued to intensify in the years between
World War I and World War II.
It is no secret that Tolkien’s anxiety over the state of philological
studies at the university level was career-long, but aspects of his attitude
about Lit. and Lang. are still in need of a fuller explanation. His underlying objective for the “Chaucer as a Philologist” lecture was not simply
to pull the rug out from under those on the side of Lit. at Oxford, but
also to demonstrate that the most compelling literary criticism rests on a
substantive philological understanding.
It is hard to tell if the Lit. and Lang. feud had a distinct origin.2 In
The Rise of English Studies (1965), D. J. Palmer documents that as far back
as 1887, the split between philology and literature was, in reality, a split
between those who studied the literature of the Middle Ages and those
who read classical and modern literature. As for the anxiety surrounding
language studies, one extreme of this attitude is expressed by John Churton Collins: “An English school will grow up, nourishing our language42
Jill Fitzgerald
not from the humanity of the Greeks and the Romans, but from the
savagery of the Goths and Anglo-Saxons. We are about to reverse the
Renaissance” (Palmer 101). Attitudes such as this one were not uncommon, and only forced philology into a category that grew increasingly
synonymous with the pejorative connotations of the “dark ages” in the
following decades. Yet, despite all the apparent drama, professors like D.
B. Monro, W. P. Ker, Henry Nettleship, and C. H. Firth were actively
concerned about giving equal weight to both language and literature.
Nettleship published a pamphlet arguing that “whatever temporary misunderstandings may arise between them [philology] is a necessary adjunct to the study of literature” (Palmer 104). His argument fell on deaf
ears, however, and was shortly followed up by Collins’ rebuttal titled,
“Philology versus Literature.”
In 1905, W. A. Raleigh and A. S. Napier oversaw a structural reorganization of the English School at Oxford with the intention of keeping Lit. and Lang. from being exclusively identified with medieval and
modern periods respectively. Their system aimed to provide English majors with something equivalent to modern “concentrations.” The reform
proposal, known as “bifurcation,” allowed separate schemes for those
perusing language study and “those who chose to specialize in literature
(the great majority)” (Palmer 128). It was submitted in 1905, and subsequently passed in 1906 (129). But questions over how to balance Lit.
and Lang. never went away entirely. By Tolkien’s time, lines had been
conspicuously drawn.
The ideological and pedagogical quarrels of the nineteenth century
were only exacerbated in the twentieth as German nationalism and Germanic philology widened the fault lines in the years leading up to World
War I. Philology had a strong presence in German institutions, and was
commonly regarded as a uniquely German science grounded in the comparative study of languages. Many were uneasy about philology because
they felt the study’s application did not always lead to an understanding
of linguistic evolution, but rather to a comparison of cultures which, by
extension, translated into national pride in the language of a particular
people. Richard Utz argues in Chaucer and the Discourse of German Philology
that the German philological impulse was acutely tied to two convictions,
the first being that “philological discourse was a home-grown German
product superior to any methodologies in other countries.” Utz’s second
point stresses the connection between the institution and the state: “by
practising and exporting this kind of superior methodology [Germany
was] contributing, in the academic arena, to [its] rise to importance as
a powerful modern nation state” (13). It is in this context that Chaucer
makes an appearance in philological debates.
Two early advocates of Chaucerphilologie were Bernhard ten Brink,43
A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.
Chair of English Philology at the University of Straßburg, and Julius Zupitza, Professor at the University of Berlin. Both professors were known
for notoriously long examinations of linguistic minutiae in their scholarship. Both ten Brink and Zupitza eventually published separate critical
editions of Chaucer’s General Prologue (Utz 45). According to Utz, a number of German philologists felt that “a close link between Chaucer and
Germany” (101) should be forged. This impulse mirrors attempts made
by philologists several decades earlier to appropriate “ownership” of Beowulf through linguistic and cultural analysis.3
Utz posits that there was a distinctly “sardonic tone in German responses to much British work in Early English studies” (109), and that
scholars such as Ewald Flügel and John Koch were some of those who
led the charge to construct German philological practices as exclusively
German. Another editor of Chaucer, Arnold Shröer, insisted “on the
primacy of German philological scholarship. . . [and] the amateurism of
[the] English counterparts.” Efforts to monopolize the study of philology
in German institutions continued well into the 1920s and 1930s, even as
both American and British philological studies were consciously being
phased out of universities (Utz 119).
After World War I, the word “philology,” especially “comparative
philology” (or vergleichende Philologie), came to be viewed as problematic
in the minds of some because it had been used as a tool for critiquing
“superior” and “inferior” languages and nations. Although much of the
damage had already been done, it took scholars like Tolkien and R. W.
Chambers to call attention to this unhealthy and unnecessary association between philology and nationalism. In 1923, Chambers contended
that “philology itself, conceived as a purely German invention, is in some
quarters treated as it were one of the things that the late war was fought
to end” (36). Scholars certainly faced an uphill battle if medieval literature and philology were going to persist at universities. Nonetheless, to
use Tolkien’s allegory, philology was moreover a reconstructive practice
by which the “old stones” could remake the “tower” (MC 8). Tolkien’s
perspective, that philology offered the foundational material on which to
build broader literary insights, is advocated in his “Chaucer as a Philologist” presentation to the Philological Society by highlighting how philology does not trump, but instead complements well-rounded literary
criticism.
In June 1925, when Tolkien applied for the Rawlinson and Bosworth
Chair of Anglo-Saxon, there was an obvious imbalance in the Oxford
English program between students who studied literature and those
who opted for language study. In his letter to the electors, Tolkien wrote
glowingly about his successes with the linguistic program during his five
short years at Leeds, noting in particular that the number of students in44
Jill Fitzgerald
linguistics rose from five to twenty.4 Tolkien wrote: “Philology, indeed,
appears to have lost for these students its connotations of terror if not
of mystery” (Letters 13). He firmly states near the end that “if elected . . .
I should endeavor . . . to advance, to the best of my ability, the growing
neighbourliness of linguistic and literary studies, which can never be enemies except by misunderstanding or without loss to both” (13).
Tolkien may have publicly advocated cooperation between Lit. and
Lang., but privately he harbored frustrations. For instance, in the Songs for
the Philologists (1936), Tolkien wrote a poem called “Two Little Schemes,”
with an alternative title “Lit. and Lang.” While his tone in this poem is
harshly satirical, it should be noted that, in reality, Tolkien did not scorn
his Lit. students. In later years he became less adamant and, in 1967,
Tolkien wrote a poem commending W. H. Auden, one of his eager pupils who received terrible grades for Lang., but excelled in and felt more
comfortable with Lit.5 Although Tolkien did not shy away from taking a
side in the Lit. and Lang. debate, it is also evident that he perceived much
of the quarreling as counterproductive, and felt bewilderment over how
the two came to be divided in the first place.
Five years after arriving at Oxford, Tolkien was proposing implementation of an A-scheme and a B-scheme curriculum like the one found at
Leeds (the “Two Little Schemes” that were the subject of the poem mentioned above). It would have been right around this period that Tolkien
read his “Chaucer as Philologist” paper. He was by no means the first to
draw Chaucer into the long-standing Lit. and Lang. debate, and he was
certainly not the last. In the opening, he suggests that Chaucer is not exactly rolling in his grave over the state of his legacy but rather, according
to Tolkien:
. . . surveying from the Galaxye our literary and philological
antics upon the litel erthe that heer is . . . so ful of torment and of
harde grace . . . One can imagine the brief burning words,
like those with which he scorched Adam [Scriveyn], that he
would address to those who profess to admire him while disdaining ‘philology.’ (109)
Tolkien quotes lines from Chaucer’s earlier dream poem, The Parliament
of Fowls (56-7; 65), where the narrator reads about Scipio, who dreams
that his ancestor, Scipio Africanus, shows him the earth from the heavens.
While Tolkien goes on to say that one may suspect that Chaucer “would
prefer the Philological Society to the Royal Society of Literature, and an
editor[ship] of the English Dictionary, to a poet laureate” (1), he never
once asserts that literary study is pointless. Rather, he argues that Chaucer was apparently intrigued by speech patterns and dialectal variety.45
A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.
Tolkien asserts that the Reeve’s Tale is an extended dialectal joke.6 Since
his paper was meant for oral delivery, the idea was that all the philologists
in the room could have a laugh at the expense of the literature crowd (if
indeed any were present). Tolkien insists that dialects are not only funny
but, in this instance, vital to analysis. Furthermore, he suggests that while
London was the locus of polite language, the really interesting places to
hear people speak in the Middle Ages would have been out in the country, particularly in college towns (4). Tolkien also informs his audience
that he is about to play professor, and read the Reeve’s Tale as though he
were to “put Chaucer through a linguistic examination” (11).
Tolkien surmises that the distinct features of the clerks’ accents can
be found in Scandinavian and Northern influences, and that geographical analysis offers further clues about where their dialects originate. The
Reeve states that the clerks come from Strother, a place name that means
simply “marsh,” as if to say the clerks come from a town called Swamp.7
As elements in place names, -strother and -strothe were once associated with
towns in Lancashire, the Lake counties, and Northumberland, some of
which are now lost, such as Caldstrother and Langstrothdale (58). Since no
actual place by the name of Strother alone seems to have existed for the
clerks to hail from, the word could also be a clue indicating their ancestry. The MED lists the names le Strodere and Strother, and Tolkien points
out that the surname, de Strother, belonged to a considerably important
family from Northumberland during the late fourteenth-century (56-8).
Although in regards to Strother, the Reeve says he “kan nat telle where”
(4015), Chaucer, at least, demonstrates a keen sense of terms, places, and
familial names particular to the remote North.8
In the Reeve’s Tale, the Cambridge students, John and Aleyn, are sent
by their manciple to Trumpington to collect grain from the miller, Symkyn. Believing that the miller is a swindler, John and Aleyn devise a plan
to outsmart him and steal extra grain and flour. The miller senses their
deviousness and retaliates by untying their horse, which they are forced to
chase until the end of the day. During the chase scene, John and Aleyn’s
habits of speech are further revealed. Tolkien evaluates Chaucer’s application of the ä/ô “sound-law” to point out the Northernisms. John and
Aleyn’s vowels show a clear retention of ä:
164 (4084) “Alas,” quod Iohn, “Alain for cristës paine,
Lai doun þi swerd, and I sal min alswa.
I es ful wight, god wat, as es a ra.
Bi goddës hertẹ, he sal nought scape vs baþe !
Qui nad þou pit þe capel i þe laþe ?
169 (4089) Il hail ! Bi god, Alain, þou es a fonne. (my emphasis)46
Jill Fitzgerald
Because of this sound change, pronunciations like bǫǫn (“bone”), and later bōn, developed in the South, whereas bān remained in the North. Tolkien remarks that “the most striking characteristic of Northern speech in
a London ear was the long ā (of O.E. or O.N. origin)” (114). He praises
Chaucer’s representation of northern ā, and his equally consistent usage
of the sound represented by “hooked o” which, he argues, a Southern
audience would have regarded as “normal usage” (114).
Tolkien next launches into an exhaustive catalogue of the Northernisms in the clerks’ ninety-eight speaking lines of the fabliau. He points
out that John says of the manciple “Swa werkës ai þe wangës in his hed
(line 4030) [the molars?/temples? in his head ache so [much]], and notes
that previous commentators gloss wanges as “molars.” Still, outside this
passage the sense “molar” is always expressed wong-tothe (cheek- or jawtooth; see MED wong n.2 def. b.). By itself, wong from OE wange usually
means “cheek.” Tolkien cites the phrase wete wonges, a sign of weeping
commonly found in alliterative poetry. 9 The ON cognate vangi, however,
meant not the cheek but “the whole side of the head” (Cleasby and Vigfusson), so that wong in John’s Scandinavian-influenced Northern dialect
might mean not “molar” or “cheek” but rather “temple.” Tolkien’s assessment of the variant meaning of the word suggests that the manciple’s
malady may be a migraine, and not a toothache, and implies Chaucer’s
familiarity with differences in Northern semantics (37-40). Moreover, by
emphasizing a word with non-normal or imperceptible usage, Chaucer
only adds to the joke.
Tolkien goes on to record certain words in the appendices that have
very few southerly attestations: gif, sal, boes, tan, ymel, and slik (for “such”).
Overall, Tolkien identifies 127 points of morphology (inflection), phonology, and vocabulary all to be regarded as distinctly variant from
Southern linguistic patterns. Finally, taking on the role of philological
examiner, Tolkien asserts that he “would award Chaucer a fairly high
mark for his effort” (16).
Of course, Tolkien admits, the MSS. of the Canterbury Tales exhibit
a great degree of dialectal and orthographic variation.10 He addresses
this obvious problem by suggesting that Chaucer’s subtle dialectal details
may have even been omitted by scribes who were not able to recognize
them, or did not fully get the “joke” (12). S.C.P. Horobin has pointed out
in his “Reconsideration of the Northernisms in Chaucer’s Reeve’s Tale”
(2001) that Tolkien leaned heavily on the Ellesmere MS for his study and
that, since his lecture, most critics have come to regard Hengwrt as the
MS from which most of the others derive or “mirror” (100). Horobin
argues that in Hengwrt the students’ Northernisms are inconsistently
represented in terms of grammar and morphology (99). Furthermore,47
A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.
he asserts that only two MSS (Cambridge Dd and BL Harley) show evidence of scribes augmenting the Northernisms, while the rest (not fully
understanding the joke) make Southern substitutions.11 Horobin concurs
with N. F. Blake that Chaucer’s main intent was to express a “flavour” of
Northern dialect “rather than [achieve] absolute philological accuracy or
consistency.” He goes on to say that “Chaucer’s representation of dialect
was no doubt further constrained by the nature of his Southern, courtly
audience, who would perhaps have had difficulties comprehending the
more extreme provincialisms of Northern speech” (104).
Horobin’s analysis may indeed cast doubt on Tolkien’s argument if
one accepts, as many (but by no means all) contemporary critics have,
that Hengwrt is a more definitive text. Nevertheless, Tolkien’s critical
work is valuable on several planes. On one level, his criticism frequently
shows a unique scholarly acumen, an ability to look in on the field and
dispel persistent misconceptions. While Tolkien’s body of scholarship is
sometimes thought to be relatively small, much of the criticism he left us
shows distinguishing impulses that defend and reinforce both his professional and creative efforts.
One often senses that Tolkien used his scholarship as a defense of his
own literary work: “I have the author of Beowulf, at any rate, on my side:
a greater man than most of us. And I cannot myself perceive a period
in the North when one kind alone was esteemed: there was room for
myth and heroic legend, and for blends of all these” (MC 16). Tolkien’s
“Chaucer as a Philologist” lecture took place five years before “Beowulf:
the Monsters and the Critics.” The latter was published the same year
as The Hobbit, in 1937 (Carpenter 269). There is a little self-advocacy in
both these essays. In other words, Tolkien justifies his avocation as a fantasy
writer in “Beowulf: The Monsters and the Critics” and defends his occupation as philologist in “Chaucer as a Philologist.”
Despite Tolkien’s role in the Lit. and Lang. dispute he had plenty of
friends on both sides of the aisle. By 1931, he continued to work diligently with C. S. Lewis among others to remake the curriculum. Still, there
is no denying that his professorship was filled with immense anguish over
the state of his beloved subject. Shippey comments on the end result of
the post-philological era:
In this entire process the thing which was perhaps eroded
most of all was the philologists’ sense of a line between imagination and reality. The whole of their science conditioned
them to the acceptance of what one might call ‘*-’ or ‘asterisk-reality,’ that which no longer existed but could with 100
per cent certainty be inferred. (Road 22)
The concept of an “asterisk reconstruction” is not unique to Tolkien,48
Jill Fitzgerald
but a creative exploit we know he dabbled in a great deal. Asterisk reconstructions involved discerning words and even whole works that must
have existed once, and reintroducing them as though they had always
been there. Tolkien also wrote pastiches, or “asterisk poems” in ancient
languages.12 Many medieval scholars undertook this practice with great
seriousness and, for some, reconstruction was more than just a popular
form of imitation. The Danish scholar and poet, Alex Olrik, re-composed the Old Norse poem, the Bjarkamál, from an Icelandic fragment
and Latin paraphrase.13 For Olrik, the goal was that a fragment could
“gradually come to life,” and in his Introduction to Heroic Legends of Denmark (1919) he encourages his audience to “live [themselves] into the
Bjarkamál’s world of thought” (86).
In the case of Tolkien, his pastiches (like his scholarship) seem tied to
his frustration with university bureaucracy. One Middle English pastiche,
called “The Clerkes Compleinte,” conveys his early sense of frustration
just two years after he began as a Reader at Leeds. This sixty-line poem
was anonymously published in The Gryphon (1922), a student and faculty
periodical at what was then “Yorkshire College.” In the poem, the narrator, a young “clerke” is discouraged from registering for the language
courses he wishes to take in the fall. During the academic year of 1921-
1922, Tolkien’s teaching responsibilities included History of the English
Language, West Saxon Texts, the Language of Chaucer, and Old and
Middle English Dialects (Scull Companion 117). One can imagine that
these courses provided him with plenty of linguistic materials to include
in this poem. The phonetics, lexis, syntax, and scansion of the Middle
English are all very accurate. It is no surprise that Tolkien was also putting the final touches on A Middle English Vocabulary three or four months
before the poem was published (Scull Companion 119).
Long before his application and appointment at Oxford, Tolkien
shows a morose sense of the dwindling status of language study. The Gryphon14 issue containing “The Clerkes Compleinte” was rediscovered in
1984 by Anders Stenström, and the poem, edited by T. A. Shippey and
Stenström, was subsequently published in the Swedish journal Arda that
same year.15 Shortly after the poem was published, Christopher Tolkien provided Stenström with a facsimile of a handwritten manuscript
of “The Clerkes Compleinte” (fol.1r – fol. 2r) which his father had revised later on in his career, probably when he was at Oxford. According to Christopher Tolkien, this copy was written no earlier than 1924
on paper used in Oxford examinations.16 Several emendations had been
made since the original version. “Leedes,” instead of being described as
the “fairest” town in Yorkshire, became the “derkest.” Instead of Leeds
being the university where the group of young clerks journey to for registration, and from whence narrator is banished, Tolkien emends it to49
A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.
“Oxenforde” in the marginalia (line 16).
To my knowledge “The Clerkes Compleinte” has not come up in
Tolkien studies outside of Shippey’s and Stenström’s commentary in Arda,
under Shippey’s entry for “Poetry in Other Languages” in the Tolkien Encyclopedia, and an annotation in Scull and Hammond’s Tolkien Companion
and Guide (2006). This poem is one of two known and complete samples
of Tolkien writing in a Middle English dialect. The other such poem
is called “Doworst,” and is also about struggling university students.
“Doworst” is in the alliterative style and meter of William Langland’s
Piers Plowman but, unlike “The Clerkes Compleinte,” the narrator’s Visio
describes Oxford students performing miserably during their oral examinations while their professors, “four clerks” who are difficult to please,
administer the questions.17
Readers familiar with Chaucer find themselves on familiar linguistic
ground from the start of “The Clerkes Compleinte,” but will quickly
realize that the mood which Tolkien establishes is starkly different from
that of Chaucer’s opening to The Canterbury Tales. Stenström’s follow-up
article in 1986 outlined the multiple variations between the version in
The Gryphon, a typescript, and the Oxford version, and included several
emendations to the Arda 1984 edition. Since copies of Arda are not widely
available, and the revised Oxford version has not been transcribed from
the facsimile published in Arda in 1986, I submit the Oxford version of
the poem in its entirety:
Þe Clerkes Compleinte
Whanne þat Octobre mid his schoures derke
Þe erþe haþ dreint, and wetė windes cherke
& swoghe in naked braunches colde and bare,
& þ’oldė sonne is hennes longe yfare; 5
Whan misti cloudes blake ymeind with smoke
her yen blenden & her þrotes choke,
& frosty Eurus with his kenė teþ
Ech man forwelked biteþ þat him fleþ,
& wrecchė cattes youlen umbewhiles,
þat slepen nat, bot wandren on þe tiles 10
(So prikeþ hem nature in her corages)—
Þan þinken folk to doon her auantages,
& seken hem faire educacioun
In yonge dayes of þe sessioun;
& specially from euery schires ende 15
In al þe north to Leedės clerkes wende, [marginal note: “londe to
Oxenforde þei wende”]
& in þe derkest toune of Yorkeschire50
Jill Fitzgerald
Seken of lore welles depe and schire!
Bifel þat in þat sesoun dim & mat,
In Leedes atte dores as I sat, 20
At morne was come in to þo halles hye
Wel nygh fyue hondred in my companye
of newė clerkes in an egre presse,
langages olde þat wolden lerne, I gesse,
Of Fraunce or Engelonde or Spayne or Ruce, 25
þo tonges harde of Hygh Almayne & Pruce;
Or historye, or termes queinte of lawe—
yit nas bot litel Latin in her mawe,
& bolde men, alas, þer were yet lece
þat þoghten wrestle with þe tonge of Grece, 30
or doon her hedes aken with etyk
& with philosophye malencolyk.
And yit an heep was þer so huge yþronge,
vnnethe mighte I tellen tho clerkes yonge
þat wolde lerne how men in Fattes depe 35
With queynte odoures hydes seþe and stepe,
or weuen wolle in webbes softe & fayre,
or brennen col & fylen nat þe ayre!
Þer soghte an huge prees matematyk
& fragraunt chymistrie & sleigh physyk, 40
& mani uncouþ sciencė for þe nones
of floures, fissches, or of oldė stones.
Þer mani vois gan maken swich a din
þe heuy ayres schooke, & many a pin
vnherd þer fil vpon þo flores wyde, 45
til þat men criden hy myn ere biside
of fees & of examinacioun,
& axede of matriculacioun,
& wher I hadde of Godes faire grace
by auenture ychaunced hit to pace. 50
Þogh maystres hadde I mo þan þryės ten,
& wysdom of an heep of lerned men,
þat were of lore expert & curious,
yit couthe I nat namore þan can a mous
of swich lettrure, ne wiste I what þey mente. 55
Lo! fro þe halles swiþe men me sente
to dwellen al a yeer withoute yate
& pleynen me of myne unkyndė fate,51
A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.
withoute yates al a yeer to dwelle
ne durrė drynken of þe clerė welle! 60
N. N. 18
The opening lines obviously evoke an array of Chaucerian allusions,
but they do so through inversion. The freshness and vitality of springtime which Chaucer conjures in the General Prologue of the Canterbury
Tales (1-27) is replaced by the chill of fall. Chaucer’s April is swapped for
October; Zephyrus becomes frosty Eurus who, instead of loosing sweet
breath, chokes the throat. The sounds of birds tweeting are replaced by
cats caterwauling, and the narrator finds himself not at the Tabard Inn,
but at the door to Leeds University at registration time. Several lines in
The Clerkes Compleinte are the same as ones found in the General Prologue:
Line 11: “(So priketh hem nature in her corages)”; line 15: “And specially
from every schires ende.” Line 28 closely resembles the final line of the
Epilogue to the Man of Law’s Tale: “Ther is but litel Latyn in my mawe”
(1190). Line 575 of the General Prologue, which refers to the Manciple,
reads, “The wisdom of an heep of lerned men”; it is echoed in line 52
of The Clerkes Compleinte. Among the list of languages from distant lands
mentioned by the clerk, Pruce and Ruce compare to the list of places
where the Knight has fought as mentioned in the General Prologue (53-4).
Tolkien has inserted several modernisms in Middle English form such as
“matriculacioun,” and “examinacioun” (lines 47-8).
While Tolkien uses the language of innuendo and polite confrontation in his address to the Philological Society, I believe that “The Clerkes
Compleinte” registers his more private tone on the matter of philology:
a deeply personal sense of marginalization and a sense of professional
lament that is also present in works like “Leaf by Niggle” and Smith of
Wootton Major. These autobiographical allegories register a sense of personal failure, of efforts gone under-appreciated, similar to the tone in this
complaint. The clerk-narrator is timid and hesitant about his interest in
languages, until he is finally frightened away from pursuing them in his
studies. The din of those registering for vocational studies such as physics, chemistry, and engineering is overwhelming to him and, in the end,
the clerk is ushered out of the hall and left to lament his fate for a year.
It is appropriate that Tolkien brought up Chaucer again and again
to emphasize his thoughts about Lit. and Lang. since Chaucer’s works
were commonly regarded as a dividing line, the place where philologists and medievalists were reputed to end their literary pursuits, and
where modernists would not venture further into the past. The Lit. and
Lang. debate has not really gone away, but been redefined in ways that
Tolkien probably never would have predicted. The Oxford curriculum
underwent further changes in 2001 when compulsory Old English was52
Jill Fitzgerald
removed. However, a compulsory History of the English Language paper (now known as The English Language) with an emphasis on sociolinguists and linguistic theory remains.19 It would be interesting to know
where Tolkien would stand on current scholarly debates involving theory
and literature, or literature and composition. Yet, I think it is safe to say,
no matter what the state of literature and language studies, he would
have looked for common ground with his students and colleagues.
NOTES
I am grateful to Professor Paul Acker for his editorial guidance with
this paper, S. Gary Hunnewell for providing me with a copy of Arda,
and Professor Thomas A. Shippey for his advice and many helpful comments.
1 The actual date of the paper’s delivery was May 16, 1931. With
the assistance of David Nichol Smith, Tolkien was putting the final
touches on the paper for publication in December 1932. At about
the same time, somewhere between the end of 1932 and the start of
the New Year, Tolkien gave the first typescript of The Hobbit to C. S.
Lewis (Scull Chronology 166-7). At the time of the lecture’s publication
in 1934, Tolkien stated that he had intended a “closer investigation
of words, and more still a much fuller array of readings from MSS.
of the Reeve’s Tale . . . But for neither have I had opportunity, and dust
has merely accumulated on the pages.” Tolkien did include textual
notes and appendices, nearly thirty pages worth, that were “naturally
omitted in reading.” Along with the reprint of “Chaucer as a Philologist,” Tolkien Studies 5 included the reproduction of a pamphlet
including Tolkien’s prefatory remarks on “The Reeve’s Tale” (1939),
which he prepared for the Oxford “Summer Diversions” (173-83).
2 J. M. Kemble’s attempt to introduce philology and Grimmian scholarship to Oxford and Cambridge during the 1830s was unpopular
(partly arising from Kemble’s cantankerousness). For information
about Kemble’s professional career, see Dickins. For correspondence
between Kemble and Jakob Grimm, see Shippey & Haarder.
3 For analysis and translations of primary sources on nineteenth-century critical scholarship about Beowulf, see Shippey & Haarder.
4 By the time Tolkien left Leeds, literature students still outnumbered
language students by a ratio of about 2:1 (Letters 12-13).
5 The poem dedicated to Auden was an imitation of the OE poem,
The Gifts of Men; see Encyclopedia “Poems by Tolkien in Other Languages,” 514.53
A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.
6 Benson cites Tolkien as the first modern critic to examine the dialects
in The Reeve’s Tale (see Riverside explanatory note, 4022). For further
critical studies on dialects and The Reeve’s Tale, see Horobin, Smith,
and Meier.
7 I owe this suggestion to Professor Paul Acker. For a further explanation of strothe, see MED and E. V. Gordon’s edition of Pearl (1953).
Gordon notes that the Gawain-poet uses the word strothe in Sir Gawain
(line 1710) to describe the fox’s hiding place, and stroþe-men in Pearl
(line 115) to mean “men of this world” also carrying “pictorially,
a suggestion of the dark, low earth onto which the high stars look
down” (note 115).
8 The clerks also swear by Seint Cutberd [St. Cuthbert] (4127), who was
commonly associated with the North, especially the county of Durham.
9 The formula my wonges waxeþ won (or wete) is commonly found in Northern alliterative works, notably in Harley 2253 (from this MS, Tolkien
points to the lyric, Alysoun); the other texts he points to are Cursor
Mundi, the York Plays, Joseph of Arimathie, Sir Tristrem, Layamon’s Brut,
and the Promptorium Parvulorum. The line also appears in two other
alliterative poems from Harley 2253 that Tolkien does not mention:
The Poet’s Repentance: “Weping haueth myn wonges wet” (line 1), and
An Old Man’s Prayer: “Unwunne haueth myn wonges wet” (line 13).
See Kurath MED wong n.(2), def. (a) for further examples.
10 Tolkien adds that “for lack of time and opportunity [this study]
is based solely on the facsimile of the Ellesmere MS.; and on the
Six-Text (Hengwrt (H), Cambridge University Library Gg.4.27 (C),
Corpus Christi College, Oxford (O), Petworth (P), Landsdown 851
(L)) and the Harleian MS. 7334 (Hl) printed by the Chaucer Society
(11). Furthermore he writes that “the copyists must, of course, usually have perceived that the clerks’ lines were abnormal in language”
(13).
11 Some of the terms he points to as having Norse roots and being replaced by Southern equivalents are: heythen, ille (from ON illr) (103).
For further information on the Hengwrt MS, see Horobin.
12 Songs for the Philologists also included four “asterisk” poems: one in
Gothic “Bagme Bloma,” and three in Old English in ballad style
(“Éadig Béo Þu,” “Ides Ælfscýne,” and “Ofer Wídne Garsecg”). For
texts and translations, see Shippey, Road 353-61.
13 The Bjarkamál was an incitement to battle recited to the troops of54
Jill Fitzgerald
King Óláfr before the Battle of Stiklastaðir (in 1030).
14 The Gryphon first appeared in 1897 and, though it was disbanded in
the 1960s, still holds the title of longest-running staff and student
periodical at Leeds. For information on the centenary celebration of
the journal held in 1997, see the online Leeds University Archives
Exhibition page under “Centenary of The Gryphon.”
15 Arda is only kept in five libraries worldwide. In the United States, it
can be found at Harvard University, Bowling Green State University,
and Marquette University.
16 For a facsimile reproduction of this page and analysis of the three
versions of the poem (one of which is a typescript emended in both
pencil and ink), see Anders Stenström’s “The Clerkes Compleinte
Revisited” in Arda 1986, pp. 1-13. There are four notes made by
Tolkien in the margins of the facsimile: line 17: londe to Oxenforde þei
wend[e]; line 23: Students are enrolled; line 41: large queue for ‘applied science’;
line 46: female students scatter hairpins (now obsolete).
17 Tolkien initially gave the manuscript of “Doworst” to R. W. Chambers. Eventually it passed to Arthur Brown. In 1978, the first nineteen
lines of the poem were printed in a fanzine by a group from Monash
University, Victoria, Australia. According to Anderson “the location
of this manuscript . . . since Brown’s death in 1979 is unknown” (144
n.6). Scull and Hammond note that a revised copy was given by Tolkien to his colleague Kathleen Lea in 1953, but they do not mention
whether or not the location of this copy is known (214).
18 “N.N.” is the signature following The Gryphon version of the text.
Shippey suggests that “N.N.” stands for “No Name.” Alternatively,
the abbreviation might stand for “Nomen Nescio,” a Latin abbreviation used to specify persons unknown or anonymous which literally
means “I do not know the name.”
19 I would to thank Professor Carolyne Larrington of St. John’s College,
Oxford for her personal correspondence regarding the current state
of the Oxford curriculum.55
A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.
WORKS CITED
Anderson, Douglas A. “R. W. Chambers and The Hobbit.” Tolkien Studies
3 (2006): 137-47.
Brook, G. L., ed. The Harley Lyrics: The Middle English Lyrics of MS. Harley
2253. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1964.
Carpenter, Humphrey. J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography. London: Harper Collins, 1995.
“Centenary of The Gryphon.” Leeds University Archives Exhibitions. 26 April
2005. <http://www.leeds.ac.uk/library/spcoll/archive/gryphon.htm> (27 September 2008).
Chambers, R. W. “Philology: General Works.” The Year’s Work in English
Studies 4 (1923): 20-37.
Chaucer, Geoffrey. “General Prologue.” The Riverside Chaucer. Ed. Larry
D. Benson. Third ed., Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988.
23-36.
———. “The Parliament of Fowls.” The Riverside Chaucer. Ed. Larry D.
Benson. Third ed., Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988.
385-94.
———. “The Reeve’s Tale.” The Riverside Chaucer. Ed. Larry D. Benson.
Third ed., Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988. 78-84.
Cleasby, Richard and Gudbrand Vigfusson. An Icelandic—English Dictionary. 2nd ed. with supplement by William A. Craigie. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1957.
Dickins, Bruce. J. M. Kemble and Old English Scholarship. London: Humphrey Milford, 1940.
Gordon, E. V., ed. Pearl. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1953.
Horobin, S. C. P. “J.R.R. Tolkien as a Philologist: A Reconsideration of
the Northernisms in Chaucer’s Reeve’s Tale.” English Studies: A
Journal of English Language and Literature 82.2 (2001): 97-105.
———. “Chaucer’s Norfolk Reeve.” Neophilologus 86.4 (2002): 609-12.
Kurath, Hans, et al., eds. Middle English Dictionary. Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press, 1952-2001.
Meier, Hans H. “Past Presences of Older Scots Abroad.” Nuttis Schell:
Essays on the Scots Language Presented to A. J. Aitken. Eds. Caroline56
Jill Fitzgerald
Macafee and Iseabail Macleod. Aberdeen: Aberdeen University Press, 1987: 116-123.
N. N. [ J.R.R. Tolkien]. “The Clerkes Compleinte.” The Gryphon: The
Journal of the University of Leeds 4.3 (December 1922): 95.
Olrik, Axel. “The Biarkamal.” The Heroic Legends of Denmark. Trans. Lee
M. Hollander. New York: American-Scandinavian Foundation.
1919. Millwood, N.Y.: Kraus Reprint, 1976: 90-8.
Palmer, D. J. The Rise of English Studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1965.
Scase, Wendy. “Tolkien, Philology, and the Reeve’s Tale: Towards the
Cultural Move in Middle English Studies.” Studies in the Age of
Chaucer: The Yearbook of the New Chaucer Society. 24 (2002): 325-
34.
Scull, Christina and Wayne G. Hammond. The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion
and Guide: Chronology. Vol. 1. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006.
———. The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion and Guide: Reader’s Guide. Vol. 2. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006.
Shippey, T. A. “Fighting the Long Defeat: Philology in Tolkien’s Life
and Fiction.” Roots and Branches: Selected Papers on Tolkien by Tom
Shippey. Zollikofen, Switzerland: Walking Tree, 2007: 139-56.
———. “Poems by Tolkien in Other Languages.” In The J.R.R. Tolkien
Encyclopedia: Scholarship and Critical Assessment. Ed. Michael D. C.
Drout. New York: Routledge, 2006: 514-5.
———. The Road to Middle-earth: Revised and Expanded Edition. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 2003.
———, and Andreas Haarder, eds. Beowulf: The Critical Heritage. New
York: Routledge, 1998.
———, and Anders Stenström. “The Clerkes Compleinte: Text, Commentary and Translation.” Arda 4 (1984): 1-11.
Smith, Jeremy J. “The Great Vowel Shift in the North of England, and
Some Forms in Chaucer’s Reeve’s Tale.” Neuphilologische Mitteilungen 95.4 (1994): 433-7.
Stenström, Anders. “The Clerkes Compleinte Revisited.” Arda 6 (1986): 1-
13.
Tolkien, J.R.R. “Chaucer as a Philologist: The Reeve’s Tale.” Transactions57
A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.
of the Philological Society (1934): 1-70 [reprinted in Tolkien Studies
5 (2008): 109-71].
———. “The Oxford English School.” The Oxford Magazine (May 1930):
778-82.
———. “The Reeve’s Tale.” Tolkien Studies 5 (2008): 173-83.
———. “Leaf by Niggle.” Tree and Leaf. London: Unwin Books, 1964;
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1965. Expanded as Tree and Leaf,
including the Poem Mythpoeia [and] The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth
Beorhthelm’s Son. London: HarperCollins, 2001.
——— , E. V. Gordon et. al. Songs for the Philologists. London: Department
of English at University College, 1936.
Utz, Richard. Chaucer and the Discourse of German Philology: A History of Reception and an Annotated Bibliography of Studies 1793-1948. Turnout:
Brepols; Cheltenham: European Schoolbooks, 2002.59
Copyright © West Virginia University Press
Echoes of Pearl in Arda’s Landscape
STEFAN EKMAN
“It is made of tales often told before and elsewhere, and of elements that derive from remote times” (MC 72). This is how J.R.R. Tolkien
described the Middle English poem Sir Gawain and the Green Knight but it
is a description which would fit much of Tolkien’s fiction equally well.
The world of Arda and the many stories set therein carry within them
echoes of earlier tales, and even though it would be terribly reductive to
discuss Tolkien’s work only in terms of its sources, knowledge of where
the echoes come from contributes to our understanding and, perhaps
more importantly, enjoyment of his world and stories. This is illustrated
as much by the numerous university courses that discuss Tolkien and his
literary roots as by the scholarship that examines Tolkien’s texts in terms
of medieval language as well as literature. Indeed, many readers take
great pleasure simply in identifying an echo from “remote times,” be it
a connection between Merlin and Gandalf, the philological roots of the
woses in Sir Gawain’s wodwos, or similarities between the battles of Fingolfin and Morgoth in The Silmarillion, and Arthur and the giant in The Faerie
Queene. Many echoes are still left unexplored, however, and in this article,
I will investigate what traces the Middle English poem Pearl may have left
in Tolkien’s creation and suggest how he made the landscape of Pearl his
own, writing it surely and truly into some of the more memorable parts
of Arda.
My point of departure is Tolkien’s poem “The Nameless Land” in
which he uses the Pearl meter and which recalls the strange and beautiful land where the Dreamer in Pearl finds himself. Apart from invoking
a similar dreamlike landscape, the poem’s setting shares several distinct
features with the Dreamer’s surroundings, but it also shows distinct connections to the world of Arda, connections which become clearer as subsequent revisions of “The Nameless Land” are taken into account. I then
examine landscapes both in Aman and Middle-earth where echoes of
the Pearl landscape can be found, discussing both physical appearance
and the associations among visions, dreams, and death which can be
found in the medieval poem as well as in the garden of Lórien in the
Blessed Realm and the Elvish realm of Lothlórien.
* * *
Ever since he first applied himself to the study of Middle English in
his teens, the two poems Pearl and Sir Gawain and the Green Knight exercised
enormous influence on Tolkien. Indeed, among his lasting academic60
Stefan Ekman
achievements must be included his 1925 edition of Sir Gawain co-edited
with E. V. Gordon, and he worked, more or less actively, with editions
and translations of Pearl and Sir Gawain from 1922 to his death (Letters 11;
Tolkien, Preface to Sir Gawain and the Green Knight 7). Tom Shippey suggests
that it would be “characteristic of Tolkien to have read Pearl and started
thinking about it literally,” wondering, along with the Dreamer, what
place this actually was (Shippey, personal communication). Not much
is told about the setting of the poem, but if Tolkien followed the same
reading strategy for Pearl as he recommends for Sir Gawain (“close and
detailed attention, and after that . . . careful consideration” MC 72), he
would discover a very vivid landscape.
The main description of the Pearl landscape is found in stanzas 6-
11. Set at the foot of mountains and beneath crystal cliffs, a wondrous
tract of woodland stretches down to a river, across which the Dreamer
converses with the Pearl Maiden. In this forest, the trees have indigoblue trunks and leaves of burnished silver (Gordon ll. 76-77). Among
their boughs there are fragrant fruits and birds of splendid colours and
beautiful voices (ll. 87-94). The gravel underfoot is precious pearls (ll.
81-82), stream banks glow like golden thread, and he walks through a
landscape of “raweƷ and randeƷ and rych reuereƷ” (l. 105), that is, according to Gordon’s notes, hedge- or tree rows (raweƷ), strips of land beside a stream or other body of water (randeƷ), and either meadows along
streams or the streams themselves (reuereƷ) (Gordon 50). Through the
elaborate concatenation used in Pearl, the five-stanza sections are united
through key words or expressions which come to characterise each section. In stanzas 6-10, the word which thus characterises the landscape is
“adubbement”, a word which means adornment or splendour according to
Gordon’s glossary, and which Tolkien translates as wonderment. Wandering through this land of wonder, the dreaming protagonist eventually
reaches a river with banks of beryl (l. 110) and a riverbed of precious
stones (ll. 117-18). There is, however, an intriguing problem of geography here, as Tom Shippey observes:
All readers realize that the river which the dreamer cannot
cross is the river of death. But in that case, where is he standing? It is not Paradise, for that is on the other side of the river;
but it is not Middle-earth either . . . . (Author 197, his emphasis; cf. Road 181)
Tolkien also appears to have given some thought to the strange land
in Pearl. In May 1924, he wrote a 60-line poem using the complex Pearl
stanza, to show that its metrical form was possible to render in modern English (Letters 317). The poem is called “The Nameless Land,” and
a version of it was published in 1927 in Realities: An Anthology of Verse61
Echoes of Pearl in Arda’s Landscape
(reprinted in The Lost Road). Shippey suggests that the poem recalls the
strange, nameless land in Pearl (Road 181), and although Tolkien does not
tie his stanzas together in the same way that the Pearl poet does, there is
no denying the sense of wonderment that pervades “The Nameless Land.”
Tolkien’s poems also share more specific features with Pearl: not only is
it suggested that it is a dream (l. 56), but there are trees with silver leaves
(ll. 3-4), wonderful fragrance (l. 16), and shining beaches beneath crystal
cliffs (ll. 35-36). There is even water impossible to cross. In Pearl, the river
of death separates the Dreamer from the Pearl Maiden and Paradise;
in “The Nameless Land,” a stream flows towards the sea which “no sail
doth know” (l. 20), a “water wide” which “no feet may tame” (l. 31).
Indeed, the river of death is also a water that “no feet may tame”—at
least not in life (ll. 318-24). The water is too deep for the Dreamer to
dare wade across, and he is unable to find a ford (ll. 143, 150); and when
he attempts to throw himself into the river and swim to Paradise, he is
whisked back to the waking world (ll.1l57-71).
It is hardly surprising that there are similarities between the mysterious land in Pearl and the Nameless Land described in a poem which was
“inspired by reading Pearl for examination purposes” (Lost Road 98). But
are they the same place? There is no explanation of what land Tolkien is
writing about, but it mentions a few places which it is not. It is obviously
not Middle-earth, the land of the living—even time behaves differently
in the Nameless Land: the “endless year” neither “fades nor falls,” the
afternoon is “ageless,” and evening never comes (ll. 6-9)—but it is also
“more faint and far” than Paradise, and “more fair and free” than the
faerie realm of Tir-nan-Og (ll. 49-50). The inhabitants described briefly
in stanza 4 are equally elusive. Lovely, certainly, and barefoot, dressed in
wind and rain (ll. 37-44) but apart from that, unknown—and unknowable—to the reader.
At this point, it is tempting to assume that “The Nameless Land”
describes a dreamland similar to that in Pearl, but the final stanza complicates such an assumption. Although the land described in the poem
might be nameless, two places connected to it are named. In line 51,
there is an invocation of the “shore beyond the Shadowy Sea” and in
the same stanza are mentioned the “beacon towers in Gondobar” (l. 57).
Christopher Tolkien, in his comment to the poem, observes that Gondobar is also mentioned in a later (c. 1940) version of Tolkien’s early
poem “The Happy Mariners” but that elsewhere, it is one of the seven
names of Gondolin (Lost Road 104; cf. Lost Tales II 160). In fact, the name
Gondobar appears already in “The Fall of Gondolin,” one of the earliest texts about Arda, dating back to 1917 (Carpenter 92; Letters 345). The
Shadowy Sea is similarly connected to Tolkien’s early writing. In Lost
Tales I, it is the name of the sea between the Great Lands (which later62
Stefan Ekman
turned into Middle-earth) and the Blessed Realm (Lost Tales I 68, 135 et
passim).
The connection between the Nameless Land and Tolkien’s earlier
work on the Silmarillion becomes even stronger when revisions of “The
Nameless Land” are taken into account. Two of at least six later reworkings are included in Lost Road: the “Intermediate” and final versions according to Christopher Tolkien (the former version, he guesses, belongs
to the time of The Lost Road, early or mid-1930s, and the latter probably
stems from the years after The Lord of the Rings but possibly as early as
1945) (Lost Road 100, 8). While some lines survive unaltered from “The
Nameless Land” to the poem’s final version, a great number of revisions
are made, setting the poem more and more firmly in Arda. While it is
beyond the scope of this article to discuss every revision, some of them
merit a closer look.
In the intermediate version (“The Song of Ælfwine” Lost Road 100-
102) references to Tir-nan-Og and Paradise are removed, together with
the names Bran and Brendan (l. 45), and in line 50 the word “Edhil” is
introduced, which is glossed as a Sindarin word for “elves” in The Silmarillion (S 358). Another addition is the phrase “west of West,” which is used
already in the pre-Lord of the Rings version of the Silmarillion to describe
the side of the Blessed Realm furthest away from the mortal lands; this
expression is kept in the published version (Lost Road 206; S 28). In the
final version an invocation of Eressëa, the Lonely Isle off the coast of Elvenhome, is added between the title and the first stanza, and “dreaming
niphredil” is substituted for the “immortal dew” in line 15 (Lost Road 102).
“Niphredil” is the white flower that greets Lúthien’s birth in Doriath and
which also grows on Cerin Amroth in Lothlórien (S 344, 91; FR, II, vi,
341f). Also, the “lingering lights” of line 1 are changed to “elven-lights.”
By removing what to most readers would be familiar references (one of
them actually precluding the possibility that the Nameless Land would
be Faerie, or Tir-nan-Og) and adding references to Arda, including more
elven names, the land (which ceases to be nameless; it has in the intermediate version a long-forgotten name and in the final version, a name unknown only by mortals (l. 27) clearly becomes Aman. This becomes even
more obvious through the radical, and quite revealing, change to the title
of the later versions. They are called virtually the same thing, “The Song
of Ælfwine (on seeing the uprising of Eärendel),” with the difference that
the later version lacks the brackets around the subtitle.
Eärendel, an adaptation of what is probably an Old English name for
the morning star (Letters 385), is an important actor in Arda’s history. The
“wandering fire” that ties together stanzas 1, 2, and 3 in the poem (lines
12-13 and 24-25 in all three versions) is the mariner Eärendel who sails
across the sky with a silmaril on his brow and his ship filled with divine63
Echoes of Pearl in Arda’s Landscape
flame (Lost Road 327; S 250). Ælfwine is a later name for Eriol (Lost Tales I
15), a character of central importance in earlier versions of Tolkien’s legendarium. His story is described by Christopher Tolkien as “among the
knottiest and most obscure matters in the whole history of Middle-earth
and Aman” (Lost Tales I 13) and the addition of his name to the title of
the poem is part of what Verlyn Flieger interprets as a development towards an increasing focus on a specific character (Flieger 72). The name
“Eriol” hints at another, if somewhat weaker, echo of Pearl as his name
means “One who dreams alone” (Lost Tales I 2).
The names Ælfwine, Eärendel, Gondobar, Eressëa, and the Shadowy
Sea all go back to writings about Arda’s First Age that predate “The
Nameless Land.” Even in these early stories, some of them written as
early as 1916-17 (Lost Tales I 1) and all of them written before Pearl inspired the writing of “The Nameless Land,” the Blessed Realm is described in terms similar to the Pearl landscape. When he wrote them,
Tolkien was already familiar with the Middle English poem. During his
first explorations of Middle English in school, he read Pearl and it impressed him sufficiently to recite from it (and Beowulf and Sir Gawain and
the Green Knight) to a group of school friends in the early 1910s (Carpenter
35, 46). Thus, the echoes of Pearl in Aman originate in Tolkien’s earlier
encounters with the poem, although they might have been amplified by
“The Nameless Land.”
To begin with, there is a superficial similarity between the landscape
in Pearl and various places in Aman. In the wondrous Pearl forest, the
gravel is pearls (ll. 81-82), the river has banks of beryl, and the pebbles
therein are, in Tolkien’s translation, “emerald, sapphire, or jewel bright”
(ll. 110, 118). In Lost Tales I, it is described how the Solosimpi bring up
pearls from the sea-beds, how the Noldoli create the gems (Lost Tales I
137-39), and how the Elvish cities and lands are adorned with these
pearls and gems. There is a clear connection between gems and water,
where “pebbles of diamond and of crystal [were] cast in prodigality
about the margin of the seas” and “the pools amid the dark rocks were
filled with jewels, and the Solosimpi whose robes were sewn with pearls
danced about them” (Lost Tales I 139). In The Silmarillion, the coast is
clearly recognisable in this description of the dwelling-place of the Teleri
(formerly Solosimpi) elves:
Many jewels the Noldor gave them, opals and diamonds and
pale crystals, which they strewed upon the shores and scattered in the pools; marvellous were the beaches of Elendë in
those days. And many pearls they won for themselves from
the sea, and their halls were of pearl, and of pearl were the
mansions of Olwë at Aqualondë . . . . (S 61)64
Stefan Ekman
Bilbo describes the coast of Aman in similar terms in the “Song of
Eärendil” that he sings in Rivendell. Eärendil the Mariner journeys “until he heard on strands of pearl / where ends the world the music long, /
where ever-foaming billows roll / the yellow gold and jewels wan” (FR,
II, i, 228).
The clearest echo, however, is found elsewhere in the Blessed Realm.
The dream-land to which the Pearl Dreamer comes to receive a vision
borders on the river of death across which lies Paradise. In Aman, a
similar place can be found in the gardens that in its Lost Tales version is
called Murmuran. It is the dwelling of the Vala of dreams and visions,
Lórien Olofántur. Beyond its boundaries lies the paradisal Valinor, and
although this realm is situated at almost the opposite end of Valinor to
the dwelling of the Vala of death, Véfantur Mandos, dream and death
are close in a different way: Lórien and Mandos are brothers (Lost Tales
I 66, 75, 77). The names of the Vala of Dream and his realm have been
constructed to underline Lórien’s function, as can be observed in the appendix to Lost Tales I. Murmuran has an unclear meaning, but contains the
word stem MURU which is connected to sleep/slumber and is probably
related to maur “dream, vision”. Another stem associated to dreams and
sleep, LORO, is found in both Lórien and Olofántur (and, in fact, Eriol), and
in the latter name, the stem FANA can also be found, carrying meanings
of visions, dreams, and sleep.
Murmuran and the Pearl landscape have other features in common
as well. Both places are located by mountains (Pearl, ll. 66, 74; Lost Tales I
75) where birds sing beautifully (Pearl, l. 94; Lost Tales I 75). Although they
largely have different trees—Lórien’s gardens have mainly coniferous evergreens, while the trees in Pearl have leaves—Murmuran “wander[s] nigh
to the feet of Silpion [the Tree of Silver later known as Telperion]” and is
lit up by its silver light (Lost Tales I 75) while in Pearl, the trees’ silver leaves
“shone with a shimmer of dazzling hue” (Pearl, l. 80; Tolkien’s translation). In Pearl’s river, stones glittered “[a]s stremande sterneƷ” (Pearl, l.
115) and in Lórien, Varda “had set stars within [the pools’] depths” (Lost
Tales I 75). Finally, and not least importantly, there are pearls, as gravel
underfoot (Pearl, l. 82) and as a bed for the vat Silindrin, in which the liquid light from Silpion is kept (Lost Tales I 75). Indeed, among the “seeds”
used for the Tree of Silver are three huge pearls (Lost Tales I 71).
The names and descriptions changed over the years, and in The Silmarillion, the brothers are called Námo (formerly Vefántur Mandos) and
Irmo (formerly Lórien Olofántur), now known by the names of their
dwellings: Mandos and Lórien. Most details about the gardens of Lórien
have been removed; it is said to be the “fairest of all places in the world”
(S 28) where the Noldor king Finwë mourns his wife beneath its silver
willows (S 64)—obviously the flora has changed somewhat—and the65
Echoes of Pearl in Arda’s Landscape
Tree of Silver still illuminates Lórien (S 99). Thus, the gardens retain
an echo of silver-leaved trees also in The Silmarillion. Lórien retains the
meaning “dream”, although this is never pointed out explicitly in The
Silmarillion. The stems ÓLOS/LOS “dream/sleep” are listed in the Etymologies (Lost Road 341-400), a list of primary stems that Christopher Tolkien
believes to be contemporary with Quenta Silmarillion, the third version of
the Silmarillion. (Quenta Silmarillion was abandoned for work on The Lord
of the Rings during early 1938 (Lost Road 3, 200, 345; cf. Letters 27, 38).)
The translation of lórien with dream can also be observed in The Two Towers, where Treebeard translates Lothlórien with Dreamflower (TT III, iv, 456).
(The stem LOT(H) “flower” is likewise found in the Etymologies.) Thus, even
the garden’s final name reveals it as a dream land.
* * *
The Pearl landscape is not only echoed in Lórien in Aman but also
in the forest realm of the same name (referred to below by its alternative
name, Lothlórien, to avoid confusion). The land in Pearl not only contains
“rych reuereƷ” whose banks glow like golden thread (Gordon, Pearl, ll.
105-06), its border is defined by a river, the river of death. Lothlórien’s
borders are similarly defined by water; the river Anduin and the stream
Silverlode protect the heartland of the sylvan realm, although it is enough
to cross the smaller stream Nimrodel to enter the land. In connection to
these watercourses, Shippey draws two parallels between Lothlórien and
the strange land in Pearl. First, he observes that the crossing of Nimrodel
brings consolation to the Company, just as the “adubbemente” of the
landscape makes the Dreamer “al greffe forƷete,” makes him happy, and
puts an end to his sorrow (Gordon, Pearl, ll. 85-86, cf. 121-23) and in both
cases, this consolation is only temporary. The river water removes “the
stain of travel,” thus cleaning and restoring lustre to the Company (Author
198; Road 218; cf. FR, II, vi, 330). Second, Shippey compares the second
river that the Company crosses, the Silverlode, to the river that is death in
Pearl. The difference, obviously, is that whereas the Company can enter
Lothlórien, the Dreamer never crosses the river to the Paradise beyond
Author 198-99; Road 218). Equating the Silverlode with Pearl’s river implies
that Lothlórien’s heartland would in fact correspond to the Pearl Paradise. Such correspondence is not necessarily corroborated by other Pearl
echoes that are found on the other side of the Silverlode, however.
Once they have crossed the Silverlode, the Company are all blindfolded until they reach Cerin Amroth. Once Frodo is relieved of his
blindfold, he experiences a world of otherworldly lustre:
It seemed to him that he had stepped through a high window that looked on a vanished world. A light was upon it66
Stefan Ekman
for which his language had no name. All that he saw was
shapely, but the shapes seemed at once clear cut, as if they
had been first conceived and drawn at the uncovering of his
eyes, and ancient as if they had endured for ever. He saw
no colour but those he knew, gold and white and blue and
green, but they were fresh and poignant, as if he had at that
moment first perceived them and made for them names new
and wonderful. (FR, II, vi, 341)
The poignancy of Frodo’s impressions parallels those of the Dreamer
in Pearl, who is in what Robert J. Blanch calls a “jewel-garden” which is
“bathed in supernatural radiance” and where “everything is effulgent
and shimmering” (Blanch 87; cf. Pearl, ll. 73-80). Again, silver trees are
part of the landscape: the tall mallorn have leaves and flowers of gold but
their bark is silver (RK, VI, ix, 303) and the Company are taken through
“rolling woodlands of silver shadows” (FR, II, viii, 362). From the top
of Cerin Amroth, Frodo first spies Caras Galadhon, the capital of the
Galadhrim. It seems to him that out of it comes the power and light that
holds the land in sway (FR, II, vi, 342). His impression echoes that of the
Dreamer’s as he first catches a glimpse of New Jerusalem, which shines
with rays brighter than the sun’s (Pearl, l. 982). When the Company arrives at Caras Galadhon, countless green, gold, and silver lights gleam
among the leaves and branches, and singing is heard from on high (FR,
II, vii, 344; cf. also FR, II, viii, 361). Again, their experience is similar to
the Dreamer’s, as he walks through a forest where the silver leaves “shone
with a shimmer of dazzling hue” (Pearl, l. 80; Tolkien’s translation) and
birds sing in sweet harmony (Pearl, l. 94). The habit of sitting in trees and
singing is apparently something the Galadhrim share with their Rivendell kin: when Bilbo first encounters the elves of Elrond’s house, they also
sit in the trees and sing (H, III, 91-92).
As with Irmo’s Lórien, the realm of Celeborn and Galadriel shares
more than some superficial similarities with the Pearl forest. It is juxtaposed with mortality and death and connected to dreams and visions.
Most noticeable is the darkness which is pointed out to Frodo as the fastness of Southern Mirkwood with Dol Goldur at its center. The power
of the elves strives with the dark power in the place where Sauron once
dwelt under the name of the Necromancer (FR, II, ii, 244; FR II, vi, 342-
43), a name with etymological ties to blackness as well as death. Death
in Pearl is not as dark, with its offer of Paradise on the other side, but it
is just as present (cf. e.g. Pearl, ll. 323-24). Similarly present is the association with dreams and visions. Lothlórien’s name is only its most obvious
connection. As she discusses Lothlórien’s status as dream in A Question
of Time, Flieger calls attention to the etymology of the name as well as67
Echoes of Pearl in Arda’s Landscape
its relation to the Vala of Dreams, but also points out that none of the
Company dreams while they are there. Lothlórien is, she suggests, “a
dream sent or dreamed by the God of Dreams and . . . the Company
in Lórien is, in one sense at least, inside that dream” (Flieger 192). Part
of Lothlórien’s dreamlike quality is its temporal vagueness. Although
called attention to only when the Company has left the elves and Sam is
puzzled by the new moon (FR, II, ix, 379), this vagueness pervades the
entire Lothlórien episode. Flieger discusses in detail how time flows in
Lothlórien as compared to the outside world and after having examined
Tolkien’s musings on time in Lothlórien from The Treason of Isengard (367-
69), she explains that after an “interior argument,” Tolkien appears to
decide that it is “better to have no time difference” between Lothlórien
and the outside world. Nevertheless, time in Lothlórien remains vague
and imprecise because “Tolkien’s theme, if not his plot, needed two kinds
of time” (Flieger 107; cf. Treason 369).
The clearest example of how time runs differently in the elven forest
is provided during the Company’s final day there. They rise and walk
with Haldir to the boats, a distance of about ten miles. When “noon [is]
at hand,” they reach the tongue of land where the Silverlode passes into
Anduin. They pack the boats and go for a test-drive up the Silverlode,
where they run into the Lord and Lady of the Land, who announce
a parting feast, after which Celeborn informs them of the lay of the
land along the river and Galadriel imparts her gifts. Then the Company
leaves, as a “yellow noon [lies] on the green land” (FR, II, viii, 360-67).
Unless the Company and the elves are remarkable efficient with their
packing, partying, and presents, something has happened to time here. It
seems as if it has almost ceased inside Lothlórien, allowing for a greater
number of actions than usual to be performed in a briefer (outside) time.
The simplest explanation would be to ascribe this temporal curiosity to
textual mistakes, but there is an alternative interpretation. According to
“The Tale of Years,” Frodo and Sam are taken to Galadriel’s Mirror on
February 14 and the Company departs on February 16 (RK, Appendix
B, 373). Since the hobbits look into the Mirror on what is obviously the
Company’s last evening in Caras Galadhon (FR, II, viii, 358-60), Wayne
G. Hammond and Christina Scull suggest that a mistake has been made
and that the correct date for the Mirror of Galadriel in “The Tale of
Years” should be February 15 (Hammond and Scull 718). But would
“a writer known for scrupulous attention to the calendar” (Flieger 100)
make not one but two mistakes for two consecutive dates? February 16,
the day of departure, is the day with two noons. Does one noon, in fact,
belong to the 15th and one to the 16th? Does the parting feast take them
through the night and out on the other side without anyone noticing? Do
Lothlórien days and nights, up to the very last, pass faster than on the68
Stefan Ekman
outside? This would explain not only what seems like inconsistencies but
would also fit with Sam’s bewildered attempt to recall more than a handful of days of an entire month.
The two noons thus imply both a moment stretched into hours, and
hours folded into a brief moment, ultimately suggesting that time in Lothlórien is not simply faster or slower than in the mortal world but following
completely different rules. This calls to mind Annika Sylén Lagerholm’s
comment that the Pearl Dreamer “go[es] back in time to an experience of
an intrinsically atemporal sphere” (Lagerholm 43, my emphasis). Like
the Dreamer, Frodo experiences a shift to a timeless (atemporal) land. Time
in Lothlórien is often expressed in terms of experience, as when it seems
to Frodo that he has stepped over a bridge of time into the Elder Days
(FR, II, vi, 340) or when he feels himself to be in a timeless land which
never fades, changes, or falls into forgetfulness (FR, II, vi, 342). In Pearl,
the otherwordly, atemporal sphere of the dream is linked to the divine
(Lagerholm 44); in The Lord of the Rings, otherwordly, timeless Lothlórien
is, at least in some ways, linked to a divine being, the Vala of Dream.
Once they have been left, the Pearl and Lothlórien dream-times differ, each representing not only dream-time but the temporal difference
between Faerie and the mortal world (cf. Langford 948). Whereas the
Dreamer wakes up to find himself back where and, since he refers to his
spiritual journey simply as a dream or vision (e.g Pearl, ll. 1170, 1180),
presumably reasonably close to when he fell asleep, the Company leaves
Lothlórien to find that much more time has passed in the world outside than they had experienced during their stay with the Galadhrim
(FR, II, ix, 379). Furthermore, where the Pearl dream-land is an eternal
realm with “kytheƷ þat lasteƷ aye” (Gordon, Pearl, l. 1198), Lothlórien is
doomed to wither and die once the power of the elves wanes. The sense
of timelessness, of atemporality, is present throughout the Company’s
stay in the Elvish domain, however, even though the difference in time is
never quite defined. Flieger links this difference to the theme of Death
and Immortality (investigated further in A Question of Time). This theme,
she explains, requires a difference in time which is “important enough to
be noticed but too important to be made explicit” (Flieger 107).
While most of Lothlórien’s dreamlike qualities are implicit, its association to visions is all the more explicit. From her first meeting with
the Company, Galadriel makes clear her farseeing abilities, telling them
that she knows that Gandalf left with them and that he did not enter the
land. She adds that there are limits to her powers; she is unable to see
Gandalf unless he is within the borders of her land (FR, II, vii, 346). The
most obvious visions, of course, are those that Sam and Frodo receive
through her Mirror. Although the Silmarillion version of Lórien only mentions the concept of visions in passing, The Book of Lost Tales explains how,69
Echoes of Pearl in Arda’s Landscape
gazing into Silindrin, Lórien Olofántur sees “many visions of mystery
pass across its [Silindrin’s] face” (Lost Tales I 75), visions similar to what
the hobbits see in the Mirror of Galadriel. While the Pearl vision includes
silver-leafed trees, however, the most ubiquitous image is the pearls; not
only as part of the setting but as the poem’s most powerful symbol. In
Murmuran, Silindrin rests on a bed of pearls but contains the liquid light
from the Tree of Silver, directly associating visions with pearls as well as
silver. The association with silver is even more pronounced in Lothlórien:
with a silver ewer, Galadriel fills a silver basin with water from a silver
stream, which springs from a fountain lit by silver lamps (FR, II, vii, 345,
352). Eärendil, the evening star, that shines down on the Mirror, contains
the light of the last silmaril (S 250; FR, II, i, 229), a light which, in turn,
stems from the Trees of Silver and Gold, Telperion and Laurelin (S 67
et passim).
Lothlórien, while sometimes referred to as the Golden Wood (FR, II,
vi, 328, 329 et passim) is in fact just as much a place of silver. The leaves
of the mallorn trees might be golden but their bark is silver and they grow
beside the Silverlode, and the name of the silver-haired Lord of Lothlórien, Celeborn, means Tree of Silver (S Index 321). In other words,
silver trees dominate Lothlórien just as they do the two other gardens of
dreams and visions.
* * *
Thus, echoes from the Pearl vision’s dreamland reverberates in Tolkien’s works. The Middle English poem provided an impetus for Tolkien
to write “The Nameless Land,” but Pearl’s wonderful, mysterious setting
also worked itself into the much larger world of Arda. There it mixed
with other echoes of other places, but some central ideas remained, ideas
of dreams, visions, death and Paradise, and the pervasive but faint image of silver trees. Ultimately, that is what the Pearl landscape is about:
dreams, visions, death and Paradise—and leaves glittering like burnished
silver in the sunlight.
WORKS CITED
Blanch, Robert J. “Precious Metal and Gem Symbolism in Pearl.” In Sir
Gawain and Pearl: Critical Essays. Ed. Robert J. Blanch. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1966: 86-97.
Carpenter, Humphrey. Tolkien: A Biography. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
1977.
Flieger, Verlyn. A Question of Time: J.R.R. Tolkien’s Road to Faërie. Kent,
Ohio: Kent State University Press, 1997.70
Stefan Ekman
Gordon, E. V., ed. Pearl. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1953.
Hammond, Wayne G., and Christina Scull. The Lord of the Rings: A Reader’s Companion. London: HarperCollins, 2005.
Langford, David. “Time in Faerie.” In The Encyclopedia of Fantasy. Ed.
John Clute and John Grant. New York: St. Martin’s Griffin,
1999: 948.
Pearl. Trans. by J.R.R. Tolkien. Ed. Christopher Tolkien, Sir Gawain and the
Green Knight, Pearl, and Sir Orfeo. London: Allen & Unwin, 1975.
Shippey, T. A. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. London: HarperCollins,
2000.
———. The Road to Middle-earth: How J.R.R. Tolkien Created a New Mythology. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2003.
Sylén Lagerholm, Annika. Pearl and Contemplative Writing. Ed. Marianne
Thormählen and Beatrice Warren. Lund: Department of English, Lund University, 2003. Lund Studies in English.
Tolkien, Christopher. “Preface.” In Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl,
and Sir Orfeo, trans. J.R.R. Tolkien. London: Allen & Unwin,
1975: 7-9.
Tolkien, J.R.R. “Sir Gawain and the Green Knight.” In The Monsters
and the Critics and Other Essays. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:
HarperCollins, 1997: 72-108.
———, trans. Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl, Sir Orfeo. London: Allen & Unwin, 1975.71
Copyright © West Virginia University Press
Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards
Kingship in J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings
and Peter Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings
JUDY ANN FORD AND ROBIN ANNE REID
Within ondary, yet independently important, to the main plot of the de The Lord of the Rings the return of the king to Gondor is sec- -
struction of the Ring. Destroying the Ring will save Middle-earth from
falling under the shadow of Sauron, but it will take the true king—Aragorn—to restore the world of men to its former glory. Aragorn must not
merely help defeat Sauron or rule a great kingdom; he must serve as the
agent of Gondor’s renewal on both the material and spiritual levels. His
destiny is inherent in his name: having entered Minas Tirith, Aragorn
says: “‘. . . for in the high tongue of old I am Elessar, the Elfstone, and
Envinyatar, the Renewer’. . .” (RK, V, viii, 141). It is made clear throughout J.R.R. Tolkien’s novel that Aragorn is a character conscious of his
destiny and determined to fulfill it. In contrast, the Aragorn of Peter
Jackson’s film version of The Lord of the Rings is far less certain about his
destiny; he is a more modern, self-doubting hero.1 These two versions of
Aragorn both arrive at the same narrative resolution, namely, becoming the king who restores the world of men to the glory of earlier ages,
but their narrative arcs describe two quite different paths. This paper
compares the treatment of Aragorn’s relationship to the office of king
in Tolkien’s novel and Jackson’s film by exploring the different cultural
concepts of kingship and heroism that inform the two versions of the
character. In both versions, the events of the Council of Elrond prove to
be crucial to Aragorn’s narrative journey and thus are a central focus of
discussion.
In the novel, Tolkien incorporates many elements from the literature and culture of the Middle Ages, particularly the early Middle Ages,
roughly the sixth through the tenth centuries. The Lord of the Rings is,
among other things, his attempt to create the sort of story that could have
been told by Anglo Saxons, filled with their beliefs, values, and ideologies,
adapted to the modern form of a novel. Many medieval elements of The
Lord of the Rings have been analyzed by scholars, especially Tolkien’s use
of literary, linguistic, and mythological sources, but little attention has
been paid to his incorporation of early medieval concepts of kingship.2
Tolkien’s conception of Aragorn as king was influenced by Anglo-Saxon,
and more broadly, early Germanic ideas.
Anglo-Saxons, like the other Germanic peoples who settled into72
Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reid
territories once held by the Roman Empire, assimilated elements from
Rome but continued to hold on to much of their earlier culture. During
the centuries of migration, settlement, and the establishment of political
states, Germanic kingship, not surprisingly, evolved a good deal, both
through contact with Rome and the force of circumstances. It is not the
purpose of this paper to trace out the complexity of these developments,
but rather to focus on the characteristics that broadly typified Germanic
kingship in contrast to later European ideas of kingship which are more
available to modern readers. Scholars in Tolkien’s time, the mid-twentieth century, argued that in pagan Germanic culture, kingship was sacral,
that is, it was grounded in a religious purpose.3
The king’s principal role, according to this theory, was to preserve the
people through his relationship with the gods. He was the head priest,
performing rituals and making sacrifices for victory in war and prosperity in peace, but the king was much more than an impersonal enactor of
ritual. Germanic kings traced their ancestry back to a god; Anglo-Saxon
kings commonly claimed descent from Woden. This divine ancestry was
believed to endow royal blood with a portion of divine wisdom and supernatural power. The king’s relationship with the gods was believed to
be crucial to the survival of the nation. The people expected to receive
guidance from the gods through their king and to be connected to the
gods through their oaths to the king. The king had to bless the fields to
bring fruitful harvests. If the crops failed, the king was blamed, and could
himself be sacrificed to the gods to restore the prosperity of the people.
This sacrifice may have happened in the case of King Olaf Tretelgia of
Sweden, who was burned in his house as an offering to Odin (Chaney
15). In short, according to pagan Germanic cultural ideas, the king was
the embodiment of the well-being of his people. He served as a living
link to the gods, and brought to the people luck and supernatural power
(12-24).
This belief in the sacral character of kingship was to persist to a
degree throughout the Middle Ages even though the concepts of royal
power underwent slow modification under the influence of Christianity
and Roman imperial models. In the eighth century, to Christianize the
traditional religious character of Germanic kingship, the church began
to anoint kings in liturgical ceremonies similar to those used to consecrate bishops and priests (Zacour 97). The king’s pagan sacral status was
transmuted to a Christian sacramental position: chosen for royal office by
God; the king was called upon to uphold divine law, defend Christianity,
protect the weak, and rule justly. Prior to standardization in the twelfth
century, royal coronations were often listed among the sacraments. Later medieval kings, deprived of both the pagan claim to divine ancestry
and the Christian status of sacramental coronation, eagerly sought the73
Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingship
canonization of their ancestors in order to claim descent from saints.
Other signs of close connections between royal families and the divine
were sought in the later Middle Ages through claims such as that of the
kings of France that God sent from heaven the oil used in royal coronations. Sacral and sacramental kingship became less important in England
after the Norman Conquest of 1066 when the more secular and contractual concept of feudal kingship took precedence. Nevertheless, remnants
of sacral kingship stayed alive in feudal and post-feudal England, as well
as elsewhere in Europe, through such beliefs as the Royal Touch: the
belief that some semi-divine quality of royal blood allowed kings to cure
scrofula, a skin disease, through touch alone (Myers 167).
The sacral model of kingship influenced the method by which kings
were selected. In early modern and modern Europe, primogeniture dictated orderly inheritance of royal titles from father to eldest son, notwithstanding the heir’s competence to rule. In pagan Germanic Europe,
primogeniture did not dictate the inheritance of a royal title. A family
line claimed divine favor through descent from a god, but not all in the
line would be believed to possess the same charismatic power on which
the tribe would depend. The people, however constituted, would elect
or choose from among the members of a royal house, or houses, the
candidate who seemed most obviously to possess divine favor. The favor
of the gods, or later, God, was believed to be manifested through luck, or
later, grace or blessing, which was not interpreted as random chance but
rather the intervention of the divine into the world of men. A candidate
for king would be believed to be close to the divine if he demonstrated
luck, especially in military matters. A candidate could also demonstrate
his close relationship to the divine by manifesting supernatural abilities,
such as prophecy or the ability to heal (Meyers 2-4; Zacour 97).
This concept of a sacral king who is both a descendant of the gods
and a mediator between them and the people seems to have guided
Tolkien’s construction of Aragorn’s journey towards kingship. In order
for Aragorn to restore the world of men, he must show the people of
Gondor that he is a living link to the gods, a man whose luck in battle
and supernatural powers prove his divine favor and justify his assumption
of kingship.
Germanic ideas of kingship serve to explain much about how Aragorn’s narrative is constructed in the novel. They provide a reason for Tolkien’s creation of a family line for Aragorn extending back to a god. The
chapter “The Council of Elrond” is where the reader first learns that
Strider is Aragorn: “‘He is Aragorn son of Arathorn,’ said Elrond; ‘and
he is descended through many fathers from Isildur Elendil’s son of Minas
Ithil” (FR, II, ii, 260). Elendil and his sons, Isildur and Anarion, were
leaders of the Faithful, the small group of Númenorians who refused to74
Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reid
be persuaded by Sauron to defy the Valar and who escaped the destruction of the kingdom of Númenor, fled to Middle-earth, and established
two realms: Arnor, in the North, and Gondor, in the South. Elendil, as
High King, died fighting Sauron, and his son Isildur cut the one Ring
from Sauron’s hand, winning the War of the Last Alliance and giving
Middle-earth centuries of peace (RK, VI, A, 325-27). Aragorn’s ancestry
establishes that he is not only descended from a royal line, but from a
line that traces its origin back to a god. Aragorn, Isildur, and Elendil
are all descendants of Melian, a Maia. The Maiar were spirits of the
same nature as the Valar, but a lesser order; they were the servants and
helpers of the Valar. The Valar and the Maiar were types of planetary
deities in Tolkien’s complex mythology, creatures of Ilúvatar, the One
God, but operationally gods in Middle-earth. Melian married an elf,
Thingol, soon after the appearance of the elves in Middle-earth.4 Their
daughter, Lúthien, married a human, Beren.5 Lúthien and Beren’s greatgrandsons, Elrond and Elros, chose different paths; the latter choosing to
be mortal. The kings of Númenor descended from Elros, and Aragorn
descended from them.
Germanic ideas of kingship also clarify the reason why Aragorn is
not accepted as king of Gondor even though no one at the Council of Elrond expresses any doubts that Elrond correctly identified Aragorn’s lineage. At the Council, except for Bilbo, whose poem promises that “The
crownless again shall be king,” no one expresses the idea that Aragorn
should be crowned. If the peoples of Middle-earth were operating on an
idea of kingship as a human office descending through primogeniture,
the Council presumably would have recognized Aragorn as king once
Elrond explained his ancestry. Clearly they were not using primogeniture
as their model for choosing kings. The reaction of the Council to the information that Aragorn is Isildur’s heir reflects instead a notion of kingship in which a candidate’s bloodline makes him eligible to be king, but is
not in itself sufficient to make him king. Boromir, the next in line for the
office of the Steward of Gondor, reacts in conformity with idea that a
true king will possess luck inherited from his ancestors when he expresses
the hope that Aragorn can win victory against Sauron and save Gondor,
if he is really a king. Boromir says: “‘Mayhap the Sword-that-was-Broken
may still stem the tide—if the hand that wields it has inherited not an
heirloom only, but the sinews of the Kings of Men.’ ‘Who can tell?’ said
Aragorn. ‘But we will put it to the test one day. ‘May that day not be too
long delayed,” said Boromir. ‘For though I do not ask for aid, we need
it’” (FR, II, ii, 281).
Aragorn does not seem to expect the others to accept him as king
simply because of his lineage. He promises to return with Boromir to
Gondor to help fight Sauron but makes no demand to rule there. Before75
Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingship
being crowned, Aragorn must demonstrate that he is worthy of being
king by showing not only that he has the favor of the gods through his
possession of luck, especially through victory in battle, but also that his
divine inheritance is active, a quality shown through supernatural abilities, such as the ability to heal. In the novel The Lord of the Rings, Aragorn’s coronation as king is not delayed for personal or tactical reasons, for
example, because he is unsure that he wants the office, or because the
steward’s son resists him. Aragorn’s narrative arc in the novel traces his
attempts to prove his luck and his supernatural qualities in order to be
recognized as king.
Between the Council of Elrond and his coronation, Aragorn’s storyline demonstrates that he possesses the sacral qualities that would mark
him as a true king. He has victory in battle, showing his luck in combat
in situations too numerous to recount. He also is shown to possess supernatural powers. Aragorn is able to command the Army of the Dead
(remnants of a people who had sworn to aid Isildur in his fight against
Sauron and who could not die until they fulfilled their oath to Isildur’s
heir) and to use a palantír: both abilities are presented as a consequence
of his bloodline, things which could be achieved only by Isildur’s heir.
Both are tests: episodes in which Aragorn is able to demonstrate that he
inherited the full measure of the qualities of his ancestors.
Even more telling is that Tolkien endows Aragorn with the supernatural quality a modern reader would be most likely to identify as a mark
of sacral kingship, because it is the characteristic that survived longest
into modern times: the ability to heal. Aragorn is able to use a plant,
athelas or kingsfoil, to cure injuries caused by the Black Riders, both to the
spirit and the body, doing so at Weathertop and the Houses of Healing.
Tolkien makes clear that Aragorn’s use of athelas is supernatural, rooted
in his inherited royal characteristics rather than in any mundane knowledge of herbs. Aragorn inherited the ability to use athelas medicinally
from his family line: it is a quality possessed in an even greater degree by
his elder relative, Elrond (RK, V, vi, 141). Others know about athelas but
those who know healing plants, such as Ioreth and the herb-master in the
Houses of Healing, dismiss it as lacking medicinal qualities. But the herb
master remembers a rhyme recited only by old wives, such as Ioreth, that
explained its relationship to the king: “come athelas! come athelas! Life
to the dying/In the king’s hand lying!” (RK, V, viii, 140), and, as Gandalf
quotes Ioreth, “The hands of the king are the hands of a healer, and so
shall the rightful king be know.” (RK, V, viii, 140). Faramir, once he is
healed by Aragorn with athelas, immediately recognizes him as the true
king:76
Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reid
Suddenly Faramir stirred, and he opened his eyes, and he
looked on Aragorn who bent over him; and a light of knowledge and love was kindled in his eyes, and he spoke softly.
‘My lord, you called me. I come. What does the king
command?’
‘Walk no more in the shadows, but awake!’ said Aragorn.
‘You are weary. Rest a while, and take food, and be ready
when I return.’
‘I will, lord,’ said Faramir. ‘For who would lie idle when
the king has returned?’ (RK, V, viii, 144)
The people of Gondor quickly follow Faramir’s lead; the text reads:
“And soon the word had gone out from the House that the king was
indeed come among them, and after the war he brought healing; and
the news ran through the City.” (RK, V, viii, 145). Aragorn’s use of athelas
to heal those affected by the Black Breath of the Nazgûl, which harms
the spirit more than the body, allows the people of Gondor to recognize
Aragorn as a true king.
Aragorn’s story is one in which he proves that he has “the sinews of
the Kings of Men,” and that he has as much right to rule as did his illustrious ancestors. After he has proven himself, Aragorn is crowned. It
is significant that Aragorn is crowned by Gandalf, a Maia, underscoring
the sacral nature of the coronation and perhaps echoing the imperial
coronation by Pope Leo III of Charlemagne, a early-medieval king famous for his efforts to renew a fallen empire. Immediately after Aragorn
is crowned, “all that beheld him gazed in silence, for it seemed to them
that he was revealed to them now for the first time. Tall as the sea-kings
of old, he stood above all that were near; ancient of days he seemed and
yet in the flower of manhood . . .” (RK, VI, v, 246). Aragorn, in his resemblance to “the sea-kings of old,” that is, the Númenorians, embodies the
link between his people and their Edenic past, uniting the past with the
present and the people with the gods. During his reign as king, Gondor
is restored to its earlier grandeur and renews its alliances with the other
Peoples of Middle-earth:
In his time the City was made more fair than it had ever been,
even in the days of its first glory; and it was filled with trees
and with fountains, and its gates were wrought of mithril
and steel, and its streets were paved with white marble; and
the Folk of the Mountain laboured in it, and the Folk of
the Wood rejoiced to come there; and all was healed and
made good, and the houses were filled with men and women
and the laughter of children, and no window was blind nor
any courtyard empty; and after the ending of the Third Age77
Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingship
of the world into the new age it preserved the memory and
glory of the years that were gone (RK, VI, v, 246).
It seems clear that just as Tolkien wove into his work the language and
literature of the early Middle Ages, he used their notions of kingship to
ground his creation of Aragorn.
But what of Peter Jackson’s Aragorn? One study has already been
published on Jackson’s adaptation of the Council of Elrond, although it
does not address the issue of kingship. In “‘Elisions and Ellipses:’ Counsel and Council in Tolkien’s and Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings,” Judith
Kollmann notes the importance of councils and counsel in Tolkien’s novel and offers a close reading of the Council scenes in both book and film.
Her overall evaluation is that the sequence as constructed by Jackson
shifts the focus from Frodo to Aragorn.6 Kollmann argues that, “except
for the fact that Frodo is healed at Rivendell and reunited with Gandalf
and Bilbo, that Boromir, Legolas and Gimli arrive, that the Council of
Elrond does take place and that the nine members of the Fellowship are
chosen, virtually everything is changed” (155). She does not enumerate
the changes in her analysis, but offers a narrative summary of action
and speech. Her conclusion is that Jackson’s framing of the Council with
scenes between Aragorn and Boromir and Aragorn and Arwen before,
and with Aragorn at his mother’s grave after, shifts the focus of the sequence to Aragorn and away from the hobbits. Her conclusion appears
to be valid but limited; the work of analyzing the impact that shift and
other changes have on characterizations and plot development remains
to be done. In this essay, we argue that one consequence of these changes
is the re-fashioning of Aragorn as a modern, self-doubting hero, a shift
that is supported by original scenes written for the film that precede the
“Council of Elrond” (Scene 27): “The Sword That Was Broken” (Scene
25), and “The Evenstar” (Scene 26).7
In the novel, Aragorn expresses no doubts about whether his royal
lineage endows him with the capacity to rule; his narrative arc is shaped
by his need to demonstrate to others that he possesses the requisite luck
and supernatural power to serve as a living link to the divine. Tolkien’s
Aragorn, echoing the heroic characters of medieval epics, is constructed
primarily through external actions, frequently directed towards preparing himself to wear the crown. Certainly there are moments when the
reader is given access, through narration and dialogue, to Aragorn’s
thoughts, and there are even times when the reader is shown that Aragorn doubts the correctness of his decisions.8 But these internal and shortlived doubts never concern Aragorn’s capacity to rule or his desire to be
king: they only concern specific actions that might be taken to achieve
the goals of destroying the Ring and becoming king.78
Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reid
In contrast, in the film, Aragorn is shown as fearing what he inherited
from his lineage as a weakness that might render him unfit to rule. As a
result of the changes in characterization, Aragorn’s narrative arc in the
film is primarily internal: he needs to overcome his own doubts about
his self-worth. In the novel, Aragorn needs to convince others of who
he is; in the film, Aragorn needs to change himself, to overcome his own
doubts. In a scene that is completely original to the film, before Aragorn’s
lineage is described, before he is revealed to be anyone but Strider, the
Ranger, the audience is told that Aragorn has rejected the very idea of
being king (Scene 24 “The Fate of the Ring”). In the discussion of how
best to face the dual threat of Sauron and Saruman, Elrond states that
neither Elves nor Dwarves can lead the fight; when Gandalf expresses
his belief that men are the ones to lead, Elrond doubts not only the abilities of men, based on his experience of Isildur’s weakness in refusing to
destroy the Ring, but also points out that Aragorn rejected the position
of king. Aragorn’s name is not actually mentioned in this scene; but an
immediate cut to a close-up of Aragorn’s face follows the dialogue, and
the film audience soon learns that Elrond was referring to Aragorn.
Within the film, as within the novel, crucial elements shaping Aragorn’s character are shown at the Council of Elrond, and, in the case
of film, the framing scenes set in Elrond’s house in Imladris before the
Council. It is there, in the chamber where Frodo recovers from the Nazgûl
knife wound, that Elrond tells Gandalf that Aragorn turned away from
the path of kingship. In the extended edition of the film, a key scene
reiterates Aragorn’s rejection of kingship: Aragorn, at his mother’s grave
in Imladris, tells Elrond directly that he never wanted the power to wield
the sword Narsil, a central symbol of Aragorn’s relationship to the crown
of Gondor in both the novel and the film (Fellowship, scene 28: “Gilraen’s
Memorial”).9 Not wanting to wield Narsil means not wanting to be king.
In a critical scene preceding the Council of Elrond, Narsil is again
used to illustrate a presentation of Aragorn’s potential kingship that differs markedly from the novel. Aragorn and Boromir meet in the library
of Elrond’s house prior to the Council and talk in front of the shards
of Narsil. This scene does not appear in Tolkien’s novel, although some
of the dialogue draws upon dialogue between these two characters elsewhere in the book. In the novel, Aragorn carries the shards of this sword
with him as a talisman of his royal lineage: the broken sword embodies
the image of a line of kingship broken when the Stewards of Gondor and
their advisors refused to consider the claims of Aragorn’s ancestors to the
throne to be legitimate.10 In the film, the sword also symbolizes Aragorn’s
royal lineage, but it is one that he has put aside, left in Rivendell on display as if in a museum. In the film, Boromir meets Aragorn, who sits,
reading a book, in the room where shards of Narsil are displayed. They79
Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingship
do not know one another and Aragorn declines to provide his name, so
Boromir’s statements about the sword are made without his knowing that
he is in the presence of a descendant of its most famous owner. Boromir’s
feeling of awe when he first sees the sword soon changes. He refers to the
sword not as an “heirloom,” as he does in the novel, but a “broken heirloom” as he lifts it up and, after some hesitancy, lets it drop to the floor
(Scene 25, “The Sword That Was Broken”). This scene underscores the
distance that Aragorn in the film has placed between himself and kingship, and it also indicates that Boromir, as a representative of Gondor,
has respect for the memory of Isildur but does not revere Aragorn’s line
as the true line of kings for the southern kingdom.
In another critical framing scene, one which immediately follows the
scene with Boromir, Arwen talks to Aragorn about his fears regarding
kingship and then pledges to become mortal, to marry him. In the book
Fellowship, Arwen appears in one scene only in which Frodo sees her at a
feast at Elrond’s house, and the discussion between her and Aragorn is
related only in Appendix A. The story of Aragorn and Arwen that appears in Appendix A was drawn upon to a great extent by the writers and
director of the film in creating Arwen’s character. In the scene which precedes the Council meeting and follows Aragorn’s meeting with Boromir,
while Aragorn picks up the piece of Narsil dropped by Boromir, Arwen
asks him what he finds to fear in the past. Aragorn answers that Isildur’s
blood runs through him, and with it, “the same weakness,” that is, the
flaw in Isildur that led him to succumb to the Ring, keeping it when he
had the chance to destroy it, a decision that led him to his death. Arwen
reassures Aragorn that he is “Isildur’s heir, not Isildur himself,” that she
believes he will succeed where his ancestor did not—resisting the temptation of the Ring and conquering Sauron. In other words, she believes
that he may have power even though his illustrious ancestor was weak
(Scene 26, “The Evenstar”). Her words stating Aragorn is “Isildur’s heir
not Isildur himself ” actually mirror a line of dialogue given to Aragorn
in the book, in a very different context. Speaking to Boromir, Aragorn
acknowledges that he bears little resemblance to the statues of the famous
kings of old, stating, “I am but the heir of Isildur, not Isildur himself ”
(FR, II, ii, 261). In the book, Aragorn makes it clear, as do other narrative
elements, that men, and the other races of Middle-earth, have degenerated since earlier Ages. His words imply his acknowledgment that he
could not hope to match Isildur’s greatness. The same words, spoken
by Arwen, reverse Aragorn’s relationship with his lineage: instead of his
ancestry providing, as it does in the novel, the grounding of his right to
rule, in the film it serves as the source of Aragorn’s self-doubt, as the reason why he chooses not to be king. He must overcome that obstacle, that
perception of inherited weakness.80
Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reid
The pivotal scene showing the difference in constructions of kingship
and of Aragorn is Scene 27, “The Council of Elrond,” which differs
from the book chapter in many respects. The book chapter has at least
twenty different characters who speak: twelve of them in the room speaking in the present of the narrative and another eight whose dialogue is
reported in lengthy passages by several of the main speakers.11 Some
characters talk for pages, such as Elrond and Gandalf, and are major
characters in the action of the book; others have only a line or two, for
example, Galdor, Glorfindel, Erestor, Frodo, Sam; at least two of these
are never seen again in the novel. In the film, the speaking parts are cut
from twelve to ten, with many sections of dialogue cut, and specific stories and topics removed entirely or shifted to other places in the film.12
The shift in number of characters speaking is more significant than the
numbers initially suggest because all minor characters are eliminated in
terms of speaking parts: Gloin, Galdor, Erestor, Glorfindel specifically, as
well as all the characters whose speech is reported by other characters,
primarily to fill in background information.13 The speaking parts in the
film are given to the nine members of the Fellowship, several of whom
are speaking for the first time in the film (Legolas, Gimli, and Boromir),
and to Elrond, with the exception of some of the background characters
in the Council who are shown arguing at one point but whose words are
not easily audible to the film audience.
The difference in content is even more striking. The chapter contains
much more exposition: on the history of Middle-earth, the long conflict
with Sauron, and current events. In the film scene, much of the exposition is missing, having been moved to other parts of the film or cut. The
chapter in the book contains much more debate, reasoned debate over
the history and the nature of the Ring, whether Bilbo’s Ring is in fact
Sauron’s Ring, and what is the best of several possible solutions to deal
with the problem, while in the film, debate quickly devolves into a shouting match with no question whatsoever that this Ring is the One Ring.
In the film, Elrond is much more directive in stating the purpose from
the start: he has called them together; they must deal with the Ring. The
action of the scene moves more quickly to the formation of the Fellowship, a resolution not given in the book chapter. As Kollmann notes, the
changes shift the focus to Aragorn. However, the change affects other
elements of the narrative as well.
The Council of Elrond in the film continues the presentation of
Aragorn’s kingship established in the framing scenes, both in regard to
his own reluctance and to the resistance of Gondor to his rule, at least
as represented by Boromir. In the book chapter, when Aragorn produces
the shards of Narsil, Elrond explains Aragorn’s lineage to the group, including the history of the Northern line in the war against evil, as part of81
Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingship
the larger exposition of the past. In the film, Legolas, not Elrond, identifies Aragorn as the heir of Isildur, and he does so not as part of an exposition of history but as a direct statement to Boromir that Boromir owes
Aragorn allegiance because he is Isildur’s heir. This concept of kingship,
in which Aragorn is owed the crown solely through primogeniture, is
quite different from the concept expressed in the novel. Aragorn, instead
of producing family heirlooms or making any other gesture connecting
himself with his lineage, merely asks Legolas to sit down. He does not
reject the idea of kingship descending through primogeniture; he merely
does not want his inheritance discussed. In the book chapter, Boromir acknowledges that the return of Elendil’s sword would be a “boon,” if such
a thing is possible, and if Aragorn is able to wield it. In the film, Boromir
sneers at the idea that he owes allegiance to Aragorn. His derision is not
directed at the concept of kingship implicit in Legolas’s statement; the
Boromir of the film seems also to accept the notion of rule based on primogeniture. Instead, Jackson’s Boromir rejects the necessity of kingship
altogether, saying “Gondor has no king. Gondor needs no king.” At no
point in the book does Boromir, or any character, reject or even question
monarchy as a form of government; the only doubt concerns Aragorn’s
fitness to rule. Even Denethor, who, in the novel, rejects Aragorn’s claim
to rule over Gondor, accepts monarchy as Gondor’s proper form of government. He says to Gandalf that “‘. . . the rule of Gondor, my lord, is
mine and no other man’s unless the king should come again.’” (RK, V,
i, 30). Moreover, Denethor’s rejection of Aragorn as an “upstart,” the
“last of a ragged house long bereft of lordship and dignity,” is spoken in
the context of his suicidal despair, and his opinion of Aragorn is made
a symptom of the culmination of Denethor’s fatal character flaw: his
unwilling to accept change (RK, V, vii, 130).
From the Council of Elrond to the end of the novel The Lord of the
Rings and the end of the film The Fellowship of the Ring, Aragorn is engaged in a very different secondary project. In both, his primary goal is
the destruction of the Ring. In the novel, Aragorn must also demonstrate
that he possesses the divine spark inherited through his bloodline which
makes him worthy of being king. In the film, Aragorn must overcome the
distrust of the anti-monarchical heir to the stewardship of Gondor. His
narrative arc in the film thus becomes more relational and less epic, more
political and less mythic.14 It culminates in a scene not narrated in the
novel: Boromir’s death. In the novel, Aragorn finds Boromir, injured, and
learns that the Orcs have taken “the Halflings” captive; Boromir has only
a few more lines of dialogue before his death: first, he expresses regret
for having tried to take the Ring from Frodo; second, he says “Farewell,
Aragorn! Go to Minas Tirith and save my People! I have failed” (TT, III,
i, 16). Aragorn reassures Boromir, but the scene is quite short. There is82
Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reid
no narrative depiction of the fight scene or of the hobbits being taken
captive. In striking contrast, at the end of the first film, Boromir’s death
scene and his redemption is made the climax: after his attempt to take
the Ring from Frodo, he is next seen coming to fight the Orcs on behalf of Merry and Pippin (Scene 45 “The Departure of Boromir). The
scene contains an extensive combat sequence in which Boromir fights on
despite multiple wounds, beyond all human strength. He has a lengthy
death scene in Aragorn’s arms in which his final words end the personal
conflict the film established between them at the Council of Elrond: Boromir has lost hope, and believes his people will be extinguished. Aragorn reassures him that he will go to Minas Tirith, that he will not let the
White Tower fall, or their people fail. In response, Boromir says that he
would have followed Aragorn, calling him “my brother, my captain, my
King.” His narrative and character arc has led him to change his beliefs
concerning Aragorn as king: he accepts the idea of monarchy, and with
it, Aragorn as heir to the throne.15
Aragorn’s internal struggle, his reluctance to becoming king, established in the film in the Council of Elrond and its framing scenes, is not
resolved until much later, in the film The Return of the King. In two scenes
not present in the novel, Scene 10, “The Reforging of Narsil,” and Scene
30, “ Andúril Flame of the West,” Arwen demands that Elrond reforge
Narsil and carry it to Aragorn. Elrond does so, riding to where Aragorn
is encamped with the Rohirrim, and offers the final argument to encourage the still reluctant Aragorn to take the sword and become king. The
only way to win the war, Elrond argues, is to have more forces; the only
forces not committed to one side or the other are the Army of the Dead
who will only follow the King of Gondor. Elrond persuades Aragorn
that he must take upon himself the responsibility of being king, both
because he was born to it and because he is needed. This scene parallels
Gandalf ’s earlier encouragement of Aragorn to help Théoden and the
Rohirrim hold their ground at Isengard. In a dramatic gesture, Elrond
presents the sword to Aragorn who pauses, then draws it, saying “Sauron
will not have forgotten the Sword of Elendil. The Blade that was broken
shall return to Minas Tirith” (Scene 30, “Andúril Flame of the West”). It
is only at this point, near the end of the film trilogy, that Jackson’s Aragorn resolves his internal struggle with self-doubt.
Critical reception of Jackson’s film has been mixed. A number of
the essays produced by literary scholars evaluating how well the film
“adapted” the book have been fairly negative.16 Much of the scholarship on the film as adaptation has come from medievalists who draw on
literary methodologies, not a surprising development given the extent to
which medievalists have dominated the scholarly analysis and teaching
of Tolkien’s novel since the 1970s, despite strong objections from some of83
Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingship
their colleagues who subscribe to the aesthetics of the Modernist canon
which condemns Tolkien’s fiction as popular and thus without merit. As
film scholars, including Karen Kline, have noted: when literary scholars
approach film adaptations, their tendency is to compare the “literary” elements of the film, such as plot, characterization, themes, to those of the
novel, and to ignore or downplay cinematic elements, such as cinematography, costuming, sets, light, and sound, including the soundtrack. Such
an approach almost always leads to some variant of the argument that
the film is inferior to the novel. Within film studies, the issue of adaptation is approached rather differently and with greater precision. Film
scholarship can, among other things, shift the analysis away from the
assumption that the novel is the primary text.
Karen Kline’s adaptation theory identifies four paradigms for analysis of films based on other texts, each involving different assumptions
and methodologies: translation, pluralist, transformation, and materialist. She argues that one reason why the same film may receive a wide
range of different critical evaluations is that different writers are working
from different paradigms, often without considering the underlying assumptions and values placed on the two texts, or without realizing the
existence of other paradigms. The four paradigms, briefly, are as follows:
the translation paradigm is concerned with how faithful the film is to the
novel, especially with regard to literary elements such as character, plot,
and theme; the pluralist paradigm independently evaluates the film’s fictional world, which may connect to the novel only on an emotional or
intellectual level; the transformation paradigm assumes the novel is only
raw material which will be changed significantly in the film which is an
original work in its own right (in this paradigm, knowledge of the novel is
not considered necessary for writing about the film); and finally, the materialist paradigm considers the novel as only one source element in the
film, other source elements include cultural and historical processes.17
This essay draws upon Kline’s pluralist and materialist paradigms.
Rather than argue whether Jackson’s Aragorn is a good or bad adaptation of Tolkien’s Aragorn, we consider these two texts in relation to each
other, analyzing how the novel and the film each construct a story. Just
as Tolkien adapted elements of early medieval Germanic culture to the
modern genre of the novel, Jackson adapted elements of Tolkien’s work
for the even more modern medium of film. We argue that changes in
Aragorn’s character made as a result of the adaptation to film shift the
portrayal from an epic hero who, while knowing he must prove himself
to others, has no doubt about his ability to do so, to a more contemporary hero who doubts himself and must deal with those doubts over the
course of the film. Some of these changes are needed to appeal to a
contemporary audience who does not know Beowulf, epic conventions, or84
Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reid
pagan Germanic notions of kingship.
This characterization may be more appealing than the original to
some in the contemporary audience although it would probably irritate
Tolkien and does irk some scholars. In her essay, “The Art of the Story-Teller and the Person of the Hero,” Kayla McKinney Wiggins’ final
judgment is that Jackson’s Aragorn is a “modern protagonist, smaller in
scope and lesser in nature” than the epic Aragorn of Tolkien’s novel, claiming that the result is viewers cannot know the characters as well because
“[w]e can’t know them with the fundamental recognition that is a part
of our primal consciousness, the part of ourselves that reaches out to
myth, and folklore, and legend, as essential truth, as absolute identity”
(121, our emphasis). Wiggins assumes the reality of a primal consciousness, a literary belief that most historians and that some literary scholars, especially those trained in most postmodern critical theories, would
not acknowledge. Contemporary critical theorists in history and literary
studies are equally uneasy with any claim of a “universal” archetype, or
with essential truths and identity, noting how such standards worked to
exclude works of literature from different cultures and perspectives over
the decades. And finally, as Louis Menand notes in a fine review of the
film which he saw in the company of a fourteen year old, what is universal for one generation is not for the next. Menand compares his youthful
reading of the novel in 1963 with his friend’s, noting that he read it as a
kind of historical novel, as opposed to the fantasy adventure understood
by a fourteen year old who had recently read the book and noted that a
good deal of the film was from the book. Menand realized a reader who
had grown up with cultural references including Xena: Warrior Princess and
computerized games is an entirely different reader than the one that he
had been in 1963. Our experiences teaching Tolkien in undergraduate
and graduate courses, to students ranging from nineteen years old to
sixty years old, as well as our experiences reading Tolkien over the course
of several decades and viewing Peter Jackson’s films multiple times, is
that, as Louis Menand realized, and as Tom Shippey says, there is now
“another road” to Middle-earth, a road that acknowledges the existence
of multiple ideas of kingship, heroism, and truths, embodying them for
different readers. 18
NOTES
1 Gwendolyn A. Morgan also identifies the modern nature of Aragorn’s self-doubt in contrast to what she calls the “pseudo-medievalist
Northern courage” of the epic hero. Morgan’s chapter offers a less
focused, more general discussion of Jackson’s translation, re-creation,
and interpretation of Tolkien’s work than does this article; moreover,
Morgan’s chapter concentrates the influence of The Wizard of Oz on85
Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingship
Jackson’s film (Morgan 21-34).
2 For example, see Burns, Flieger, and Nelson; and Chance and Siewers.
3 The historiography of the nature of pagan Germanic and early medieval medieval kingship has changed over time, and scholars today
are much less optimistic than their predecessors of the mid-twentieth
century about recovering Germanic culture as it existed prior to Roman contact because it was communicated through intermediaries,
such as Tacitus, who were hardly disinterested observers. Norman
Cantor’s Inventing the Middle Ages describes the ideas of the most influential medievalists of the twentieth century, including the concepts
of medieval kingship put forth by Percy Schramm and Ernst Kantorowicz as a combination of Christian and Roman influence with a
heroic tradition of Germanic kings exemplified in the poem Beowulf,
as well as Marc Bloch’s work on the royal touch (79-117, 140). The
“sacral kingship” thesis would have been widely acknowledged during Tolkien’s time. For descriptions of this understanding of kingship,
see Chaney, Myers & Wolfram, Leyser and Zacour.
4 The wording in Appendix A of The Lord of the Rings leaves no doubt
of Melian’s divinity: “Lúthien Tinúviel was the daughter of King
Thingol Grey-cloak of Doriath in the First Age, but her mother was
Melian of the people of the Valar” (RK, VI, A, 314). The marriage of
Thingol and Melian occupies a chapter in Tolkien’s The Silmarillion.
5 Beren and Lúthien also have their own chapter in The Silmarillion.
6 Kollmann’s extensive essay focuses on a primarily descriptive comparison of all major council scenes in book and film, and on how the
pacing of the film downplays and changes the importance of counsel
as well as councils. We do not disagree with her readings of book and
film for the most part. Her work focuses primarily on analyzing differences between the two works without evaluating the film directly
although some of her language at times indicates an assumption that
the changes in the film lessen the impact of the councils and theme of
counsel and communal wisdom. Her concluding argument concerning the changes in Aragorn focuses on the shift from Tolkien’s more
masculine Aragorn, needing to be complemented by the feminine
Arwen, to the nature of Peter Jackson’s Aragorn who is balanced
within himself, having both masculine and feminine characteristics.
7 Scene numbers and titles are from the Extended Editions.
8 Aragorn expresses some uncertainty about their route when speaking86
Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reid
to Gandalf in “The Ring Goes South,” discussing whether to attempt the Redhorn Gate or go by way of Moria (FR, II, iii, 300-
1). He is also uncertain about what is best to do after the Company
leaves Lothlórien: his original plan to accompany Boromir to Minas
Tirith has been changed by the death of Gandalf, and he is unable to
direct Frodo or the others to make a clear decision (FR, II, viii, 383).
Most strongly, in “The Departure of Boromir,” at the start of The
Two Towers, he believes “an ill fate is on [him] this day,” (TT, III, i, 3)
leading him to make ill decisions, and Boromir’s death leads him to
feel that he has failed, and he does not know what to do (TT, III, i,
15). These doubts have more to do with Tolkien’s exploration of the
interplay of free will and fate than with the theme of kingship. After
Boromir’s burial and the elegy, Aragorn is able to make the decision
to take the remaining members of the company to rescue Merry and
Pippin, instead of following Frodo and Sam (TT, III, i, 21).
9 Within film studies, the canonical text is the theatrical version. Arguably, the scene at the grave was cut because Aragorn’s refusal to
accept the sword, and the power of the kingship, was established in
the scenes between Gandalf and Elrond, and between Aragorn and
Arwen. Our work on the film draws from both releases, and on occasion makes use of the Special Features as well, just as our work on
Tolkien’s novel draws from other publications relating to the novel,
including his letters and the History of Middle-earth volumes edited by
Christopher Tolkien.
10 Aragorn was from the line of kings of the northern kingdom, Arnor,
who were the only descendents left from the Númenorian kings after
the death of King Eärnur of Gondor (RK, Appendix A, 348). The
debate over the legitimacy of the line of Northern kinds to rule in
Gondor is detailed in Appendix A. Arguably, the decline of Gondor under the later Stewards, especially Denethor, and the increasing
threat of Sauron, and Aragorn’s deeds lead the people of Gondor to
reconsider that earlier rejection.
11 Tom Shippey, in the second chapter of J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the
Century, rightly argues that the Council of Elrond chapter is a “large
unappreciated linguistic tour de force, whose success may be gauged by
the fact that few pause to recognize its complexity” (68).
12 The most notable of these shifts is the movement of much of the
history and background of the Ring being shifted from Gandalf in
the Council scene to Galadriel in the voice-over at the start of the
first film. Since Tolkien wished to include parts of what later became
The Silmarillion with The Lord of the Rings so that this extremely long87
Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingship
expository scene need not be included in the novel, the writers’ and
director’s decision to move the key information, along with Bilbo’s
finding of the Ring in Gollum’s cave, into a “prelude” makes perfect
sense. In Letter 131 to Milton Waldman, written to argue that some
of the mythic and historical material such as “The Silmarilllion” and
The Downfall of Númenor, should be published with the novel which
would allow the cutting of “much explanation of background, and
especially that found in the Council of Elrond (Bk II)” (Letters 161).
13 The long description of Gandalf ’s imprisonment by Saruman and
his escape is shown directly, in the main film narrative and in a flashback when Gandalf is speaking to Frodo when he wakes
14 We agree with Morgan’s argument that the changes in Jackson’s film
add up to a more secularized text than Tolkien’s novel.
15 Some critics see Boromir as being given the function reserved for
Faramir in the novel, of being the first to recognize Aragorn as king.
The changes in Faramir’s character and the effects on the structure
and themes need to be the subject of a separate essay.
16 See, for example Chance, “Is there a Text in this Hobbit?” and “Tolkien’s Women (And Men): The Films and the Book.”; Bratman, Croft
“Mithril Coats,”; Wiggins, and Timmons. More positive evaluations
include Mallinson, Paxson, Akers-Jordan, Gaydosik, and Thum. All
but two of the scholars of the essays in the Mythopoeic Society anthology edited by Janet Brennan Croft are literature or composition
scholars or librarians. One scholar is trained in film studies; a second
is working from a religious studies method. Tom Shippey, a philologist who served as an advisor for the film, presents a nuanced argument concerning important thematic shifts in the film while arguing
that his reading is that of someone who prefers the book, in “Another
Road to Middle-earth.”
17 Film scholars do not necessarily consider knowledge of the book that
is the source of a film to be important, as J. E. Smyth’s essay, “The
Three Ages of Imperial Cinema from the Death of Gordon to The
Return of the King” demonstrates. Smyth is interested in how Jackson’s
film fits within the ideology of imperialism in film and does not mention the book. Sue Kim’s “Beyond Black and White: Race and Postmodernism in The Lord of the Rings Films” analyzes racial coding in
the film, considering the racial constructions in Tolkien’s novel, but
then moves to an analysis of the impact of the films on the economy
and social structures of New Zealand.
18 “Another Road to Middle-earth.”88
Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reid
WORKS CITED
Akers-Jordan, Cathy. “Fairy Princess or Tragic Heroine? The Metamorphosis of Arwen Undómiel in Peter Jackson’s The Lord of the
Rings Films.” In Croft: 195-214.
Bratman, David. “Summa Jacksonica: A Reply to Defenses of Peter Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings Films, After St. Thomas Aquinas.” In
Croft: 27-62.
Burns, Marjorie. Perilous Realms: Celtic and Norse in Tolkien’s Middle-earth.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2005.
Cantor, Norman F. Inventing the Middle Ages. The Lives, Works, and Ideas of
the Great Medievalists of the Twentieth Century. New York: William
Morrow, 1991.
Chance, Jane. “Is there a Text in this Hobbit? Peter Jackson’s Fellowship
of the Ring.” Literature Film Quarterly 30.2 (2002): 79-85.
———. “Tolkien’s Women (And Men): The Films and the Book.” In
Croft: 175-194.
——— and Alfred K. Siewers, eds. Tolkien’s Modern Middle Ages New York:
Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.
Chaney, William A. The Cult of Kingship in Anglo-Saxon England: The Transition from Paganism to Christianity. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1970.
Croft, Janet Brennan. “Mithril Coats and Tin Ears: ‘Anticipation’ and
‘Flattening’ in Peter Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings Trilogy.” In
Croft: 63-80.
———, ed. Tolkien on Film: Essays on Peter Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings.
Altadena, CA: The Mythopoeic Press, 2004.
Flieger, Verlyn. “Frodo and Aragorn: The Concept of the Hero.” In Tolkien: New Critical Perspectives, ed. Neil D. Isaacs and Rose A. Zimbardo. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1981: 40-62.
Gaydosik, Victoria. “‘Crimes Against the Book’? The Transformation of
Tolkien’s Arwen from Page to Screen and the Abandonment of
the Psyche Archetype.” In Croft: 215-230.
Kim, Sue. “Beyond Black and White: Race and Postmodernism in The
Lord of the Rings Films.” Mfs: Modern Fiction Studies 50.4 (Winter
2004): 875-907.89
Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingship
Kline, Karen E. “The Accidental Tourist on Page and on Screen: Interrogating Normative Theories about Film Adaptation.” Literature
Film Quarterly 24.1 (1996): 70-83.
Kollmann, Judith. “Elisions and Ellipses: Counsel and Council in Tolkien’s and Jackson’s The Lord of the Rings.” In Croft: 149-171.
Leyser, K. J. Rule and Conflict in an Early Medieval Society. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell, 1989.
The Lord of the Rings. Theatrical and Extended Editions. Dir. Peter Jackson. New Line. 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004.
Mallinson, Jeffrey. “A Potion too Strong?: Challenges in Translating the
Religious Significance of Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings to Film.”
In Journal of Religion and Popular Culture 1 (Spring 2002). Electronic publication: <http://www.usask.ca/relst/jrpc/articletolkien.html>.
Menand, Louis. “Goblin Market.” New York Review of Books 49, no. 1 (Jan.
17, 2002): 8-9.
Myers, Henry A. and Herwig Wolfram. Medieval Kingship. Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1982.
Morgan, Gwendylyn A. “I Don’t Think We’re in Kansas Anymore: Peter
Jackson’s Film Interpretation of Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings.”
In Fantasy Fiction Into Film: Essays, ed. Leslie Stratyner and James
R. Keller. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2007: 21-34.
Nelson, Charles W. “The Sins of Middle-Earth: Tolkien’s Use of Medieval Allegory.” In J.R.R. Tolkien and His Literary Resonances: View of
Middle-earth, eds. George Clark and Daniel Timmons. Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press, 2000: 83-94.
Paxson, Diana. “Re-vision: The Lord of the Rings in Print and on Screen.”
In Croft: 81-102.
Shippey, Tom. “Another Road to Middle-earth: Jackson’s Movie Trilogy.” In Understanding “The Lord of the Rings”: The Best of Tolkien
Criticism,” ed. Rose A. Zimbardo and Neil D. Isaacs. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 2004: 233-54.
———. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
2002.
———. The Road to Middle-earth: How J.R.R. Tolkien Created a New Mythology. Revised and Expanded Edition. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
2003.90
Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reid
Smyth, J.E. “The Three Ages of Imperial Cinema from the Death of
Gordon to The Return of the King.” In Croft: 3-23.
Thum, Maureen. “The ‘SubSubcreation’ of Galadriel, Arwen, and
Éowyn: Women of Power in Tolkien’s and Jackson’s The Lord of
the Rings.” In Croft: 231-256.
Timmons, Daniel. “Frodo on Film: Peter Jackson’s Problematic Portrayal. “ In Croft: 123-148.
Wiggins, Kayla McKinney. “The Art of the Story-Teller and the Person
of the Hero.” In Croft: 103-122.
Zacour, Norman. An Introduction to Medieval Institutions. 2nd ed. New York:
St. Martin’s Press, 1976.91
Copyright © West Virginia University Press
The Unique Representation of Trees in
The Lord of the Rings
CYNTHIA M. COHEN
When 1955), it became the first literary work to portray tree-like beings The Lord of the Rings was originally published (in 1954 and
as ontologically distinct from regular trees. Before The Lord of the Rings
and during Tolkien’s lifetime, other authors who had imagined trees that
did not behave or appear like trees of the Primary World had conceived
of these creatures simply as trees—strange, extraordinary, malicious, or
friendly trees—and they perceived no need to further distinguish them.
For the purposes of this article, literary trees are divided into four categories: (1) trees that do nothing unusual, appearing essentially as Primary
World trees; (2) trees that remain rooted in the ground but are able to
talk, think, and/or feel; (3) trees that remain rooted but can move their
branches or trunks as trees of the Primary World cannot; and (4) trees
that can uproot themselves, physically moving from one place to another.
These categories are augmentations: trees in all categories but the first
can talk, think, and/or feel; and trees in the fourth category can move
their branches or trunks as well as relocate themselves. When these categories are applied to The Lord of the Rings, Ents and Huorns fall into the
fourth category, Old Man Willow belongs in the third, trees of the Old
Forest and Fangorn Forest fall into the second or first categories (although
most readers assume they belong in the third or fourth), and the remainder of trees in the text belong in the first. As this article will demonstrate,
Tolkien distinguishes trees of the fourth category from all others; he implies but does not confirm that trees of the third category are something
other than trees; and he seems to accept that trees of the second category
can convincingly be called “trees.” The following survey of texts written
before or contemporaneously with The Lord of the Rings—texts that contain trees of the third and fourth categories—reveals the originality of
Tolkien’s consideration of such trees as ontologically distinct.
I. The Uniqueness of Tolkien’s Method
Trees of the third and fourth categories often appear in literature as
trees upon which human characteristics have been projected. This can
be partly attributed to morphological similarities: for instance, humans
and trees both have trunks, limbs, and crowns, in roughly comparable
locations, and both typically stand upright. Another explanation, Tolkien suggests, is that people wish to associate or communicate with other92
Cynthia M. Cohen
living things (MC 152), expressed by G. K. Chesterton in a legend of the
Barbary Coast (1922):
St Securis . . . grew to love [trees] like companions. . . . And
he prayed that they might be loosened from time to time to
walk like other things. And the trees were moved upon the
prayers of Securis. . . . The men of the desert . . . [saw] the
saint walking with a walking grove. (58)
Chesterton portrays these trees as trees—trees that physically move as
Primary World trees cannot, but trees all the same—illustrating the key
difference between Tolkien and every other author surveyed here. Where
other authors saw no need to ascribe words other than “tree” (or familiar
species names of the Primary World) to tree-like creatures that did not
act like actual trees, Tolkien opted for linguistic distinctions that would
complement his literary descriptions. In The Lord of the Rings, the words
“Ent” and “Huorn” signal ontological differences from trees; other authors made no such distinction.
David Lindsay and Ludvig Holberg, for example, both wrote about
trees of the fourth category. An unusual creature—at first glance simply
“a great tree floating in the water . . . upright, and alive”—appears in
Lindsay’s A Voyage to Arcturus (1920), a book that Tolkien read “with avidity” (Lindsay 187; Letters 34). Maskull discovers that the crown “actually
was a sort of head, for there were membranes like rudimentary eyes”;
he realizes that he can ride this tree, directing it through watercourses
by covering up some of the “eyes” (Lindsay 188). Though once referred
to as “the huge plant-animal,” the creature is otherwise called a “tree.”
Similarly, the ambulatory trees that populate Holberg’s The Journey of
Niels Klim to the World Underground (1742) are called “trees” and identified
as familiar species (49, 85). Curiously, these trees have strikingly unarboreal features: “on the top of the trunks or bodies of the trees their heads
were placed, not at all unlike human heads; and instead of roots, [they
had] two feet” (Holberg 19). The cypresses, in particular, display varying
eye shapes (oval or square), numbers (from one to four), and locations
(forehead or back of the head) (Holberg 85). Neither these eyes nor the
other unarboreal features seem to justify a new class of being—Holberg
(like Lindsay) merely describes a very strange sort of tree.
Extraordinary trees also appear in two works by George MacDonald.
The Golden Key (1867)1 contains a scene reminiscent of Tolkien’s hobbits encountering Old Man Willow in the Old Forest. A child in this
story encounters a tree that, though it moves of its own accord, is still
conceived of simply as a tree: “It dropped its branches to the ground all
about her, and caught her as in a trap” (MacDonald, Key 14). Phantastes
(1858), on the other hand, offers a more complex association of sentient,93
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
ambulatory trees identified by species (7). Anodos describes the Ash as
a creature of terrible and changing light, with an especially disturbing
face (MacDonald, Phantastes 21–22). Anodos relates that the Ash “bent
his Gorgon-head, and entered the cave . . . He drew near me . . . He
came stooping, like a beast of prey”; the Ash then retreats and disappears
(MacDonald, Phantastes 39–40). Although they clearly fall into the fourth
category of literary trees, MacDonald’s ambulatory trees are not distinguished by name from trees that remain rooted.
A similar portrayal of ambulatory trees can be found in The Chronicles of Narnia series by C. S. Lewis, who considered Phantastes a “great
literary experience” and “a major influence upon his thought and work”
(Lewis, W. H., and Hooper 47, 322). In The Magician’s Nephew (1955, Book
1 according to internal chronology), Aslan first awakens the trees, together with other natural elements. Aslan commands them to “be walking
trees” and tells the Oak, “Come hither to me” (Lewis, C. S., Magician’s
126, 130). Trees are not seen walking again in Narnia until Prince Caspian
(1951, Book 4 according to internal chronology), when they are needed
to fight the Telmarines. While Lewis may have been influenced here by
Tolkien, their execution differs: Tolkien not only distinguishes between
trees and Ents (where Lewis only describes trees—“Awakened Trees”),
Tolkien further distinguishes Huorns (who travel to Helm’s Deep but remain rooted during the battle, while Ents are consistently ambulatory).
Lewis’s relocated forest is entirely ambulatory: “Instead of being fixed
to one place, [imagine it] was rushing at you; and was no longer trees
but huge people; yet still like trees because their long arms waved like
branches and their heads tossed” (Lewis, C. S., Prince 196). Implying that
these trees are like people, Lewis takes a tentative step toward a new ontological class, but he retracts this perspective by the novel’s end, where
these beings are once called “the tree people” but otherwise are called
“trees” (Lewis, C. S., Prince 210–12). Conversely, Tolkien’s cultural descriptions in The Lord of the Rings emphasize the human side of Ents,
building narrative depth that makes his own representation credible.
Lewis also once refers to animated trees as dryads and hamadryads,
using the terms somewhat interchangeably, while Greek mythology distinguishes the two: each type of being maintains an identity unequivocally distinct from the trees with which they associate, but while a dryad may
move freely among the trees and groves where she lives, a hamadryad is
physically and emotionally bound to a particular tree (Lewis, C. S., Prince
117–18; Porteous 115). The Classical tradition also includes a notable
example of trees moving in ways that Primary World trees cannot. Ovid
describes Orpheus, who sits atop a hill and attracts a host of trees by
playing irresistible music (Simpson 167). Ovid’s long, annotated species
list describes some species (poplar, laurel, umbrella pine, and cypress)94
Cynthia M. Cohen
drawn from other Classical myths where people are transformed into
trees, yet most of the featured species have no such derivations. This is
an example of the tree-lists (or tree catalogues) in Classical and medieval
poetry. Although tree-lists appear in the works of Seneca, Lucan, Statius,
Claudian, Boccaccio, Chaucer, Virgil, and others, only Ovid describes
the trees of his list as ambulatory (Root 19; Boitani 28). Even so, Ovid
does not distinguish his myriad ambulatory species from the stationary
trees of the real world.
Trees with human characteristics can also be found in the Old Welsh
poem “Cad Goddeu,” attributed to Taliesin, where trees are transformed
into warriors (Jones 65). Taliesin names various familiar tree species and
enumerates their military deeds; for example, “Fine hawthorn delivered pain,” and “Pear worked oppression on the battlefield” (Ford 185).
Marged Haycock recognizes clichés of heroic poetry in Taliesin’s descriptions, citing the traditional Welsh practice of metaphorically describing
kings and warriors in terms of trees and architecture, using words such as
“tree, column, post, prop, beam, [and] roofbeam” (302–04). While “Cad
Goddeu” may have inspired Tolkien in much the same way as Shakespeare’s Birnam wood—sparking his desire for trees to defend themselves
in battle—the poem provides no verisimilitude, revealing no attempt to
present a Secondary World that is convincing to the reader (Letters 212 n).
Neither Shakespeare nor Taliesin considers that, if trees could march at
all, they would no longer be recognizable as familiar trees of our world.
The graphical representation of literary trees must also be considered, as illustrations can affect how a reader apprehends the text. Arthur
Rackham, a prime example in the context of this discussion, was perhaps
best known for producing images of trees with human attributes (Hamilton 13).2 Rackham’s credits include Fairy Tales of the Brothers Grimm (1900
and 1909), Shakespeare’s Macbeth (1908) and The Tempest (1926), Charles
S. Evans’s The Sleeping Beauty (1920), Milton’s Comus (1921), Hans Christian Andersen’s Fairy Tales (1932), and Kenneth Grahame’s The Wind in
the Willows (1940), all of which offered Rackham the opportunity—with
threatening or enchanted woods, trees that speak or are otherwise conscious, or spirits trapped in trees—to draw anthropomorphic trees (Hamilton 185–86). Although Rackham’s illustrations appear in no text featuring trees of the third or fourth categories (i.e., trees that physically move
as Primary World trees cannot), his suggestions of arm-like branches,
leg-like roots, and facial features on tree trunks influence how the trees
in these stories have been received. While these trees speak, think, or exude an ominous aura without moving in ways that Primary World trees
cannot, the vivid corporeal texture of Rackham’s drawings make the
oral, mental, and psychic faculties of these trees explicitly physical. Trees
that belonged—by their authors’ intentions—to the first and second95
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
categories, function—through Rackham’s interpretation—as trees of the
third or fourth categories. The result, however, is consistent with all other
texts here reviewed, as even the most anthropomorphically drawn trees
are still considered trees.
Another popular text to consider is The Wonderful Wizard of Oz (1900)
by L. Frank Baum. The trees in this story belong to the third category:
“Just as [the Scarecrow] came under the first branches they bent down
and twined around him, and the next minute he was raised from the
ground and flung headlong among his fellow travellers.” The Woodman
fares better with a practical, Primary World approach, demonstrating
that these “Fighting Trees” have the same weaknesses as real-world trees:
“When a big branch bent down to seize him the Woodman chopped at
it so fiercely that he cut it in two. At once the tree began shaking all its
branches as if in pain.” Baum suggests that the trees can move because
they have been “given [a] wonderful power,” demonstrating that Baum
conceived of these beings as ordinary trees endowed with extraordinary
qualities (311–12).
The final example surveyed here is T. H. White’s The Sword in the
Stone, which Tolkien read soon after it was published in 1938 (Scull and
Hammond, Reader’s Guide 818). In the “Dream of the Trees,” various
tree species engage in a long discussion; afterward, they dance: “they
moved their bodies but not their feet,” and they “rippled their twigs like
serpents, or made slow ritual gestures about their heads and bodies with
the larger boughs” (White 248). Like Holberg, MacDonald, and others
explored in this article, White’s trees of the third category are conscious
manifestations of familiar tree species, differing only in that they occur
within the framework of a dream—a construct that Tolkien deemed inappropriate to a fairy-story (MC 116).
Lindsey, MacDonald, and Lewis aspired, as Tolkien did, to place
their stories in a believable Secondary World; the authors of “Cad Goddeu” and the Classical story of Orpheus, conversely, had no interest in
preserving “the inner consistency of reality” (MC 138–40). While the
trees discussed here serve different narrative and symbolic functions in
context, the reader initially apprehends each through literal description,
making some judgment—whether relevant to the story or not, whether
conscious or not—as to how realistic the scenario seems. Considering
The Lord of the Rings against the backdrop of these literary trees will emphasize how differently Tolkien portrays trees in his own work.
II. Narrative Significance of Botanical Characteristics
Tolkien differs from the authors surveyed above not only by distinguishing between trees and tree-like beings but also by making first-category trees significant in the narrative. The prominent place of trees96
Cynthia M. Cohen
in The Lord of the Rings is often identified solely with Ents, Huorns, and
Old Man Willow—characters readers tend to describe as trees that can
physically defend themselves. Sharing the textual landscape with such
captivating creative inventions, Tolkien’s subtle weaving of the botanical
characteristics of familiar and fictional tree species into the narrative can
easily be missed. All trees in The Lord of the Rings mirror the essential qualities of trees in the Primary World. Even the few that belong to Tolkien’s
fictional species are built from the same “primary material” as familiar
species: their trunks, leaves, branches, and roots invariably display colors,
textures, shapes, and seasonal variations that can be found in the Primary
World (MC 140).
Familiar Tree Species of the Primary World
The first example of Tolkien’s literary use of botanical characteristics
occurs soon after the newly assembled Fellowship leaves Rivendell: they
arrive at Hollin, a place whose history is recorded in its ancient holly
trees (FR, II, iii, 295). The people of Hollin planted holly trees to denote
the boundaries of their land, as expressed in the place-names “Hollin”
(extant in modern-day England) and “Eregion” (Tolkien’s word, glossed
as “holly-region”) (FR, II, iv, 316; Miles 159; Tolkien, “Nomenclature”
772). Unique in Middle-earth’s history, Hollin is one of a very few places
where Elves and Dwarves interacted peacefully and productively (RK,
Appendix B, 363). Tolkien captures this history using botanical qualities
characteristic of real-world holly trees when he describes the “grey-green
trunks [that] seemed to have been built out of the very stone of the hills,”
grafting the Dwarves’ association with craftsmanship and stone upon the
Elvish affinity for trees and forests (FR, II, iii, 295; RK, Appendix F, I,
410). Few tree species could have been employed for this purpose, but
the bark of holly—pale, grey, and “strangely smooth”; indeed, “quite
different from that of most other trees”—is well suited to the task (Morse
22–24). By choosing a tree with bark resembling stone, Tolkien aptly
illustrates the cultural history of Hollin with unmodified “primary material.”
Likening holly to stone lends permanence to something transient,
reinforcing a key function of the “Three Rings of Power” created in
Hollin, which enable the bearer to “ward off the decays of time and
postpone the weariness of the world.” The history of the One Ring also
begins in Hollin (S 287–88). The power and significance of this place
is captured in two individual holly trees at the western entrance to the
Mines of Moria:
Close under the cliff there stood, still strong and living, two
tall trees, larger than any trees of holly that Frodo had ever97
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
seen or imagined. . . . They towered overhead, stiff, dark, and
silent, standing like sentinel pillars at the end of the road.
(FR, II, iv, 316)
The vast size of these trees reinforces the prominence of Hollin’s history,
and their placement at the boundary of Elvish and Dwarvish lands recounts that unprecedented friendship. The trees’ size, although unusual,
is not unheard of in the Primary World. Though the common holly (Ilex
aquifolium), a native evergreen tree common in Britain, is often found as
an understory plant, ornamental shrub, or hedgerow tree—all forms of
generally small stature—it can grow up to fifty (and, rarely, seventy) feet
tall, if protected well and left undisturbed long enough (Miles 156).3 The
size of the hollies outside Moria, therefore, can be attributed to potential Primary World circumstances; their extraordinary associations come
from connections with Middle-earth’s fictional history.
Later in the story, Tolkien once again weaves the botanical characteristics of Primary World trees into the narrative as Frodo, Sam, and
Gollum reach the Cross-roads of Ithilien en route to the Pass of Cirith
Ungol:
They became aware that these [trees] were of vast size,
very ancient it seemed, and still towering high, though their
tops were gaunt and broken, as if tempest and lightning-blast
had swept across them, but had failed to kill them or to shake
their fathomless roots. . . .
At length they reached the trees, and found that they
stood in a great roofless ring, open in the middle to the sombre sky; and the spaces between their immense boles were
like the great dark arches of some ruined hall. (TT, IV, vii,
310–11)
Many chapters prior, Elrond recounts Gondor’s history, describing Osgiliath straddling the Great River, Minas Ithil to the east, and Minas Anor
to the west (FR, II, ii, 257). These landmarks of Gondor were linked by
an east–west road, while a perpendicular road ran along the foothills of
the Mountains of Shadow, joining northern Gondor to the port cities of
South Gondor. Over time, Gondor’s waning vigilance yielded the landscape to less-desirable inhabitants; Minas Ithil and Minas Anor became
Minas Morgul and Minas Tirith, engaged in constant warfare, and Osgiliath was deserted (FR, II, ii, 258). When Gondor was strong, the Crossroads linked places associated with prosperity and military victory; by the
time Frodo, Sam, and Gollum arrive there, the Cross-roads have come to
connect Minas Tirith, Gondor’s last stronghold, to threats, enemies, and
reminders of failure: to the east, Minas Morgul, occupied by the enemies
of Men; to the north, the scene of the last great battle between the free98
Cynthia M. Cohen
peoples of Middle-earth and Sauron’s forces; to the south, the disputed
region of South Gondor and the land of Harad, “a refuge for all the enemies of the king” (RK, Appendix A, I, iv, 327). To Gondor, lacking military strength and under constant threat from Mordor, the Cross-roads
are part of a failed infrastructure that once kept evil at bay.
This degraded state is evoked by the dominant elements that Frodo,
Sam, and Gollum encounter at the Cross-roads. An old stone statue of a
king, its head broken off and mockingly replaced with a crudely painted
stone, sits among the trees; the visual parallel Tolkien draws between
the trees and this statue affords the trees a symbolic link to Gondor’s
history. The statue demonstrates the current phase of Gondor’s leadership: a once great nation led by strong rulers, descendants in a line of
kings, has fallen into decay and lost its predestined leaders. The image
of the statue, headless but still upright and bodily strong, is reinforced by
the surrounding vast, lofty trees with broken tops. Tolkien reasserts the
connection between the trees and Gondor’s failing leadership by describing the trees’ collective structure in terms of a ruined hall (TT, IV, vii,
311). While the solidity of the tree trunks and the stone statue conveys
Gondor’s former strength, the shattered tree-tops and dislodged statue’s
head plead discontinuity; though Gondor still exists—respectable, determined, steadfast, and rooted in this place—the suffering nation displays
the wounds of war. Even broken, these icons are formidable, reflecting
a crippled nation upheld by a strong and determined few: Boromir, Faramir, and, ultimately, Aragorn. These enduring trees, battered but still
alive, infuse the inert stone statue with their life force by virtue of proximity and similarity; the trees become identified with the statue, as they
do with the symbolism of the Cross-roads, gaining narrative significance
with no alteration of botanical characteristics.
From a botanical perspective, Tolkien’s representation of the trees
at the Cross-roads is thoroughly credible in the Primary World, though
they are not identified by species: the trees are characterized by great
height and girth, seemingly great age, crown dieback (an arboricultural
phenomenon suggested by the broken tree-tops), and possible exposure
to extreme weather. These characteristics, while insufficient for specific
identification, could apply to many tree species in the Primary World.
Trees endure a lifetime of exposure to weather; not able to regenerate
injured tissue as animals and people can, trees incorporate wounds and
breaks into their physical structure. While crown dieback often indicates a serious, potentially fatal problem, such as infectious disease or
inadequate water transport in the tree (e.g., due to root damage or soil
problems), it may also be a natural response mechanism (Costello et al.
25–26; Rane and Pataky 77–78). An ancient tree, for example, is likely to
demonstrate crown dieback during the “Veteran stage” of growth, when99
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
the general branch structure has already been achieved but the tree continues to gradually increase in girth. Because a tree obtains its food from
its leaves, the loss of a large branch (and its leaves) hampers a tree’s ability
to feed itself. If a major branch is lost, the tree may respond by allowing
other branches to die in order to sustain the rest of the tree:
This does not mean that the tree is about to die, it is a condition that can persist for many decades or even centuries. . . .
The response of the tree results in a new balance between
the area of woody material and that of the leaves. (Read
28–29)
Thus the “gaunt and broken” tops of the Cross-roads trees are consistent
with ancient trees in the Primary World. This arboricultural understanding forges another connection with the headless statue: the head, separated from its body, is ringed with delicate plants resembling a small silver
and gold crown. Frodo draws hope from this sight and exclaims, “They
cannot conquer for ever!” (TT, IV, vii, 311). Just as an ancient tree’s dead
upper branches do not necessarily indicate impending death, the present
signs of Gondor’s decline will not dictate the future of the nation.
Fictional Tree Species in The Lord of the Rings
The White Tree of Gondor represents the deeper history of Men in
Tolkien’s Secondary World, reaching back to the Two Trees of Valinor:
Telperion had dark green leaves that “beneath were as shining silver,” and
Laurelin had gold-edged leaves “of a young green like the new-opened
beech” and clusters of yellow, horn-shaped flowers (S 38). Telperion becomes known as the “White Tree” or the “Silver Tree”; Laurelin is generally called “the Golden.”4 Yavanna’s gift, to the Elves in Tirion upon
Túna, of Telperion’s first descendant marks the first link in the White
Tree’s chain of relation; named Galathilion, this tree was “a lesser image
of Telperion” that did not bear light (S 59). Celeborn, propagated from
Galathilion, flourishes in Tol Eressëa.
Telperion’s descendants develop greater significance once the original White Tree in Valinor is destroyed (S 76). In Númenor, the White
Tree starts to function as an indicator of the health of the kingship. Nú-
menor’s White Tree, a seedling of Celeborn received from the Elves,
is named Nimloth, planted in the King’s court, and respectfully tended
(S 259–63). Under Ar-Gimilzôr, the White Tree goes untended and declines, but his successor, Tar-Palantir, honors the White Tree and prophesies that the line of Kings will end when the White Tree dies. The throne
passes to Ar-Pharazôn who worships Melkor, defies the Ban of the Valar,
and consents to cut down the White Tree (S 266–72). Before Númenor100
Cynthia M. Cohen
is destroyed, Isildur smuggles Nimloth’s seedling to Middle-earth (S
276–80; RK, Appendix A, I, i, 317). For the first time, the White Tree is
planted in Gondor when Isildur settles at Minas Ithil (S 291–92).
The White Tree of Gondor’s health, though symbolically tied to the
kingship throughout the history of Men, is not systematically affected by
the strength of Gondor’s leadership. Sauron kills Nimloth’s first scion in
Middle-earth after one hundred years. Twelve years later, Isildur claims
the One Ring. Two years later, Isildur plants a seedling of the White
Tree at Minas Anor (Minas Tirith) and is slain within the year. That
White Tree lives 1,634 years, dying during The Great Plague that also
kills the king and his children. An heir to the throne is found, and a
White Tree seedling is planted four years after the Plague. The death of
the last White Tree, however—that which stands dead during The Lord
of the Rings—threatens to fulfill Tar-Palantir’s prophecy (RK, Appendix
B, 365–69). At the time of The Lord of the Rings, the tree has stood dead
in the citadel of Minas Tirith for one hundred sixty-six years, and the
White Tree of Gondor comes to represent Gondor’s waning power and
lack of a king.
Yet in the minds of Tolkien’s characters, the image of the White Tree
of Gondor repeatedly emerges as a symbol of Gondor’s strength. Pippin hears Gandalf sing about “Seven stars and seven stones / And one
white tree,” and Gollum recalls “tales out of the South . . . about the
silver crown of [the] King and his White Tree” (TT, III, xi, 202; TT, IV,
iii, 249). Faramir holds the White Tree as a symbol of hope, wishing to
“see the White Tree in flower again in the courts of the kings, and the
Silver Crown return, and Minas Tirith in peace” (TT, IV, v, 280). During
most of his lifetime, Faramir knows the actual White Tree only in death:
a stark, skeletal reminder of the progressive failure of his people. Yet the
image of the living White Tree is constantly reinforced in Gondor as a
symbol of national identity, prompting the persistent memory of Gondor’s former strength and the potential promise of the nation’s future. In
Minas Tirith, Pippin sees the White Tree embroidered upon a uniform
that he soon will be wearing, and he first meets Denethor under a virtual shadow of the White Tree: Denethor’s chair sits beneath an empty
throne, behind which a jeweled image of a flowering tree is carved upon
the wall, reinforcing the connection between the ongoing crisis of leadership in Gondor and the lack of a living White Tree (RK, V, i, 25–26).
To represent the hope of renewed strength in Gondor, the White
Tree need not function outside the normal parameters of familiar Primary World trees. While replacement by a sapling of the same species
designates the White Tree incapable of resurrection, the tree’s mortality
is notable in light of an analogous Christian legend that Tolkien would
have known. The White Tree of Gondor distinctly parallels the Dry Tree101
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
described in The Travels of Sir John Mandeville (Mandeville’s Travels), which
presumably died when Christ died; it was said that the tree would live
again once “a great lord from the western part of the world [conquered]
the Holy Land with the help of Christian folk” (Moseley 74). The image of a dead tree replaced by a live one, as the White Tree of Gondor
is, upholds the metaphor of resurrection and enables Tolkien to draw
an implicit connection between Aragorn and Christ without suggesting
anything botanically extraordinary about the tree.
The White Tree of Gondor’s botanical details are finally revealed
as Aragorn prepares to assume the kingship, confirming that this tree
is built from botanical details of Primary World trees. Aragorn finds a
sapling with “leaves long and shapely, dark above and silver beneath,”
bearing one small cluster of white flowers (RK, VI, v, 250). The shape
and color of the leaves recall the white willow (Salix alba), abundant in
England, which has silky, white hairs on the underside of the leaf (Morse
67). The same colors are also found in England on white poplar (Populus
alba), with shiny leaves that are dark grey-green on one side and silverywhite on the other, and on common whitebeam (Sorbus aria), which retains “startlingly white-woolly” hairs on the underside of the leaf (Morse
66; Johnson and More 150, 292). Common whitebeam has clustered,
white flowers characteristic of several species in the rose family (Rosaceae)5 (such as wild cherry [Prunus avium], common and midland hawthorn
[Crataegus monogyna, C. laevigata], and common rowan [Sorbus aucuparia], all
native to England), any of which Tolkien might have used as a model for
the White Tree’s flowers (Edlin 58; Johnson and More 284, 300, 322–23;
Rackham, Ancient Woodland 351–56). The most extraordinary feature
of the White Tree of Gondor—that it must have germinated from a
seed planted at least one hundred sixty-six years before Aragorn discovers the sapling—also has analogues in the Primary World: lotus seeds
have germinated after over one thousand years, and Arctic tundra lupine seeds have germinated after an estimated ten thousand years (Stern
138).6 These seeds germinated after a period of dormancy, a process
that prevents a seed from sprouting in an environment where conditions
are likely to inhibit survival (Stern 198). Low temperatures, like those
likely to occur on Mount Mindolluin, may cause dormancy (Schopmeyer
26–28). The White Tree of Gondor, whose seed remains dormant under
harsh conditions in a remote location and germinates after a long period
of time, is drawn from real characteristics of Primary World trees.
Without exceeding botanical accuracy, the symbolic associations of
the White Tree of Gondor connect the kingdom’s history with its present and future. Upon seeing Gondor’s White Mountains, Aragorn recites: “West Wind blew there; the light upon the Silver Tree / Fell like
bright rain in gardens in the Kings of old,” reinforcing the thematic link102
Cynthia M. Cohen
between Telperion, the White Tree (or Silver Tree) of Valinor, and the
White Tree of Gondor (TT, III, ii, 25). The interchangeability of “Silver
Tree” and “White Tree” destabilizes the time and place Aragorn refers
to. Overlaying Gondorian imagery with allusions to the Blessed Realm—
“West Wind” and “Silver Tree” associated with light falling “like bright
rain”—this poem demonstrates the continuum of time described by the
White Tree’s lineage, which itself echoes the lineage of the kings who
tend and replace it. Perpetuating Telperion’s line is a royal responsibility, as the tree’s survival relies utterly upon the diligence of the surviving
kings: “though the fruit of the Tree comes seldom to ripeness, yet the life
within may lie sleeping through many long years . . . if ever a fruit ripens,
it should be planted, lest the line die out of the world” (RK, VI, v, 250).
While the White Tree of Gondor describes the linear history of Men,
Lothlórien’s mallorn trees seem not to experience the passage of time at
all. Also not native to Middle-earth, this fictional species descends from
trees known first on Tol Eressëa and subsequently on Númenor. When
mallorn fruits given to Gil-galad by Tar-Aldarion did not take root in
Lindon, Gil-galad gave seeds to Galadriel “and under her power they
grew and flourished in the guarded land of Lothlórien” (UT 168). Legolas provides the first description of these trees in The Lord of the Rings:
In the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn to gold. Not till
the spring comes and the new green opens do they fall, and
then the boughs are laden with yellow flowers; and the floor
of the wood is golden, and golden is the roof, and its pillars
are of silver, for the bark of the trees is smooth and grey. (FR,
II, vi, 349)
Tolkien provides more detail in Unfinished Tales and confirms that mallorn
trees are modeled upon familiar Primary World species:
Its boughs [were] somewhat upswept after the manner of the
beech; but it never grew save with a single trunk. Its leaves,
like those of the beech but greater, were pale green above
and beneath were silver . . . it bore golden blossom in clusters
like a cherry. (UT 167–68)
The mallorn seed is described as “a small nut with a silver shale” (RK,
VI, ix, 302). Beth Russell remarks upon the mallorn’s flower–fruit combination, atypical of Primary World trees: “most nut-bearing trees have
tiny wind-pollinated flowers, whereas trees that produce large, colorful
flowers are animal-pollinated and have their seeds contained in various
kinds of [fleshy] fruits but not in nuts” (22). Although the mallorn as
a composite resembles no known Primary World tree, each individual
botanical detail of the mallorn can be found in some familiar species.103
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
Mallorn most resembles the Primary World beech, whose spring foliage
emerges as “emerald leaves clothed in silver down”; like the mallorn,
the leaves that change color in autumn may remain on the tree until
spring (Edlin 15). Leaves of common beech (Fagus sylvatica) turn copper
and then brown; Oriental beech (F. orientalis) leaves turn a rich yellow
(Campbell-Culver 83–84). Beech trees are known for having giant trunks
covered by smooth, grey bark, and beeches growing near one another in
a group are likely to grow tall and have straight trunks (Sutton 68; Miles
80). Mallorn flowers mimic the clustering habit of cherry blossoms but
not the color, as cherry flowers are rarely yellow; even so, yellow flowers
occur on several Primary World trees found in England such as common
lime (Tilia × vulgaris), common laburnum (Laburnum anagyroides), and the
golden-rain tree (Koelreuteria paniculata) (Johnson and More 328; Sutton
156, 130).
The Primary World features contributing to the mallorn’s form draw
symbolism from creative associations of “primary material” with other
narrative elements. The smooth, grey bark and gold-colored leaves allow
Legolas to describe Lothlórien in terms of a magnificent hall adorned
with precious metals, conveying a landscape of immense value (FR, II,
vi, 349). Trees resembling precious metals recall the dream landscape of
Pearl, where leaves “did as burnished silver slide / That thick upon twigs
there trembling grew,” tangentially connecting Lothlórien to the literary
tradition of the Earthly Paradise (Tolkien 91; Patch 149–50). Silver and
gold reflect Lothlórien’s community leaders by mirroring the colors of
Celeborn and Galadriel’s hair, and also recall the Two Trees of Valinor
(FR, II, vii, 369).
Like the mallorn’s botanical details, the overall shape of each mallorn tree contributes to the narrative. By supporting Lothlórien’s dominant architectural form, mallorn structure provides the literal, physical
foundation for Lothlórien’s cultural landscape: the branches first growing
outward, then upward, and the “the main stem [near the top] divided
into a crown of many boughs” allow for the building of flets (FR, II, vi,
357). The direction of branch growth recalls (but does not mirror) the
cedar of Lebanon (Cedrus libani), and the divided main stem displays a
typical Primary World growth response to a dead, removed, or damaged
terminal bud (Howard 39–40; Harris, Clark, and Matheny 15). Just as
the mallorn’s botanical morphology combines details of different Primary World trees, the mallorn’s branch structure incorporates potential
growth forms of various trees under various conditions, not specifically
corresponding to any individual species but generally observable in the
Primary World.
Some typical patterns of tree development, however, are disrupted in
this place. At his first sight of Lothlórien, Frodo observes that “no blemish104
Cynthia M. Cohen
or sickness or deformity could be seen in anything that grew upon the
earth” (FR, II, vi, 365). Yet no tree in the Primary World, exposed to
weather, other organisms, and time, maintains any degree of perfection.
Trees can isolate areas of wounding and injury through a process called
compartmentalization, which allows trees to survive and thrive even as
parts of them continue to decay (Harris, Clark, and Matheny 34–35).
The absence of decay in Lothlórien is due to the Ring of Power that
Galadriel wears, not to any extraordinary immunity of the mallorn trees:
this ring “[preserves] what is desired or loved, or its semblance” (Letters
152). In this unnatural state of perfection, the mallorn trees reflect the
residents of Lothlórien, who are immune to disease and decay.
As symbols of community identity, alive and present in daily life,
mallorn trees are more real and immediate for the Elves of Lothlórien
than is the similarly functioning White Tree in Gondor. Tolkien wrote
that “Lothlórien is beautiful because there the trees [are] loved,” implying that the relationship between Elves and mallorn trees is more
than close—it is symbiotic (Letters 419). For residents of Lothlórien, the
trees are a metonym for their notion of home. Haldir is distressed by the
thought of leaving for Valinor; he says that “it would be a poor life in a
land where no mallorn grew” (FR, II, vi, 363). Galadriel poignantly refers
to the Undying Lands:
I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold there grew:
Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew.
Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea,
And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree.
(FR, II, viii, 388–89)
Conflating the mallorn with Laurelin the Golden and herself with Yavanna, Galadriel yearns for the Blessed Realm. The identification of
these Elves with mallorn trees persists in verse remembered even beyond
Lothlórien’s borders: Legolas first describes the trees based on songs
known in Mirkwood (FR, II, vi, 349).
Postscript: A Mallorn in the Shire
The planting of a single mallorn tree in Hobbiton somewhat mitigates the mutilation of the Party Tree, and this mallorn keeps the memory of Lothlórien alive once the Elves have left for Valinor. Just as the
seed hidden in the soil is only revealed a few paragraphs before Sam
plants it, the species is not identified until the seed germinates in spring.
The young mallorn, like the many children born that year in the Shire
and the plentiful harvest, is a sign of regeneration, happiness, and hope.
For the hobbits of the Fellowship, this mallorn provides a vivid memory105
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
of their adventure and makes them appreciate their home all the more.
For the other hobbit residents, the mallorn is a wondrous sight connecting their formerly isolated home to other lands and cultures; furthermore, the mallorn ensures continued interaction with the outside world
because people travel to see it (RK, VI, ix, 302–03). Establishing a chain
of cultural associations similar to the White Tree of Gondor, the mallorn in the Shire metaphorically connects hobbits to Elves and the Valar
because, by this point in the narrative, most of Lothlórien’s Elves have
relocated to the Undying Lands. The web of cultural and historical interrelationships forged among the Elvish, human, and hobbit members
of the Fellowship is representationally maintained by the mallorn in the
Shire and the White Tree of Gondor: specimens of two fictional tree species that remain highly accessible to their respective hobbit and human
neighbors.
In a text known for its highly original portrayal of tree-like beings,
significant first-category trees such as these can also be found. This combination is rare, for, in the hands of other authors, regular trees typically
pale in comparison to trees that can do extraordinary things. In The Lord
of the Rings, trees like those in the Primary World are not overshadowed
by other, more extraordinary trees; they play important roles while trees
that might otherwise steal the spotlight are simply not considered trees
at all.
III. Arrangements Too Unlike the Primary World
Before Tolkien had conceived of Ents as tree-herds, the narrative
already contained several significant trees of the first, second, and third
categories. The holly trees at Hollin and the mallorn trees of Lothlórien,
literary trees of the first category (essentially like Primary World trees),
had already been committed to paper. The hobbits’ experience in the
Old Forest, containing an ambiguous coexistence of trees of the second
category (stationary trees that can talk, think, and feel) and the third (trees
that remain rooted but can independently move branches or trunk), also
had been written. Although Tolkien would not consciously distinguish
between regular and extraordinary trees until after Ents emerged in their
final form, “The Old Forest” chapter indicates he was already considering the possibility that trees of the third category—like Old Man Willow—could not convincingly be called “trees,” while trees of the second
degree—like the other trees of the Old Forest—could.
The Old Forest and Old Man Willow
“The Old Forest” is seldom recognized for the deliberately detailed,
botanically credible, and carefully crafted chapter that it is. Verlyn Flieger106
Cynthia M. Cohen
considers the Old Forest “consciously menacing, consciously ill-intentioned toward those humans who invade it”:
In the course of the hobbits’ journey through its tangled pathways the Old Forest trips them, traps them, throws branches
at them, blocks their progress, forces them to go where it
wants rather than where they want, and does everything in
its not inconsiderable power to make them feel unwanted,
unwelcomed, and unliked. (“Eco-Conflict” 148)
Flieger represents the scholarly consensus, indiscriminately ascribing sentience and a capacity for movement to all trees of the Old Forest. Claudia
Riiff Finseth similarly asserts that these trees “do untreeish things that
go against the laws of nature” (40). Anne C. Petty claims that “the Old
Forest…contains trees that are actively hostile toward creatures of the
outside and deliberately react to obstruct their progress,” asserting that
the trees act “with very deliberate intent” (150–51, 236). Dinah Hazell
writes that the Old Forest’s “danger comes from the trees themselves”
(73). These assertions overlook two important points: that the trees take
no physical action of which trees in the Primary World are incapable,
and that the single tree that does so is not necessarily a tree at all.
“The Old Forest” chapter can be separated into three distinct segments that trace the evolution of Tolkien’s storytelling from the adoption of a traditional motif to the generation of a highly original fictional
forest. The first segment contains a very credible description of the Old
Forest trees that could easily apply to a Primary World forest. The second segment consists of quick movement through successive areas of
changing forest density, serving as a transition to the third segment: the
encounter with Old Man Willow. The trees are represented as more “unlike . . . the actual arrangements of the Primary World” as the chapter
proceeds through each segment, and it appears that Tolkien took pains
to maintain “the inner consistency of reality” as this chapter developed
(MC 138–40).
In the first segment of the chapter, perhaps originally intending to
portray the Old Forest as “the standard fairy-tale dark wood on the order
of those in ‘Snow White’ and ‘Hansel and Gretel,’” Tolkien ultimately
constructs a more realistic interpretation (Flieger, “Eco-Conflict” 149).
Yet because the Old Forest superficially presents as a familiar motif, readers expect enchantment there; likewise, the hobbits, having heard rumors, expect to meet trees of the second, third, or fourth categories at
every turn. Early in the narrative, Sam’s neighbor calls the Old Forest
“a dark bad place, if half the tales be true” (FR, I, i, 30). Fatty Bolger is
“more afraid of the Old Forest than of anything [he knows] about: the
stories about it are a nightmare” (FR, I, v, 118). Merry stirs up any latent107
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
fears just before the hobbits enter the Old Forest:
[The trees] watch you. . . . Occasionally [in daylight] the
most unfriendly ones may drop a branch, or stick a root out,
or grasp at you with a long trailer. But at night things can
be most alarming, or so I am told. I have only once or twice
been in here after dark. . . . I thought all the trees were whispering to each other . . . and the branches swayed and groped
without any wind. They do say the trees actually move, and
can surround strangers and hem them in. (FR, I, vi, 121)
Even Merry’s alleged eyewitness account smacks of rumor, peppered
with phrases like “so I am told” and “they do say.” The hobbits’ subsequent experience of the forest is similarly unsubstantiated: the hobbits’
feelings of being watched, attacked, and sabotaged by the trees are entirely imagined:
[The hobbits] picked a way among the trees, . . . carefully
avoiding the many writhing and interlacing roots. . . . As they
went forward it seemed that the trees became taller, darker,
and thicker. . . . For the moment there was no whispering
or movement among the branches; but they all got an uncomfortable feeling that they were being watched with disapproval, deepening to dislike and even enmity. . . . They found
themselves looking up quickly, or glancing back over their
shoulders, as if they expected a sudden blow. (FR, I, vi, 122)
Tolkien’s language is very consistent: phrases such as “it seemed that the
trees became taller, darker, and thicker,” “there was no whispering or
movement . . . but they all got an uncomfortable feeling,” and “as if they expected a sudden blow” present the scene in terms of the hobbits’ feelings
and perceptions rather than any physical action performed by the trees
(emphasis added). Despite the constant suggestion that the trees can purposely inflict harm, the hobbits’ first glimpse of the Old Forest consists
only of elements plausible in the Primary World: tree trunks “straight or
bent, twisted, leaning, squat or slender, smooth or gnarled and branched;
. . . stems were green or grey with moss and slimy, shaggy growths” (FR, I,
vi, 122). Neither is there anything extraordinary about “writhing and interlacing roots”—these adjectives, conveying a sense of movement, also
describe forms sometimes seen in tree roots: with plentiful rainfall and
limited sunlight, trees may develop “snaky” roots that extend laterally
over the surface of the soil (Menninger 21, 34). Roots established just below the soil surface also could be revealed as a result of soil erosion. Trees
in compacted, poorly aerated, or excessively wet soils typically produce108
Cynthia M. Cohen
very shallow root systems that can emerge above ground (Harris, Clark,
and Matheny 228).
The first segment of the chapter continues as the hobbits, ready to be
frightened in the Old Forest, blame the trees for their inability to find a
path through the woods. As before, Merry sets the tone: he says that the
Old Forest contains “open tracks [that] seem to shift and change.” As he
nearly gets lost trying to lead the party to a vaguely remembered route,
“the trees seemed constantly to bar their way” and “the wood seemed to
become more crowded and more watchful than before.” Finding his way,
Merry reflects: “These trees do shift. There is the Bonfire Glade in front
of us (or I hope so), but the path to it seems to have moved away!” (FR, I,
vi, 121–22; emphasis added for “seem” and “seemed”). Despite Merry’s
assertion, the trees do not move—a point demonstrated by Tolkien’s consistent use of language. A forest is an ever-changing system: various parts
of the trees constantly grow while other parts fall to the ground. Without
weekly gardener visits, a constant wind, or periodic flooding, debris will
collect under any living tree, creating a thick layer of organic matter that
could easily obscure a path on the ground. Furthermore, where trees
are the only landmarks, most people would become disoriented or lost.
Indeed, the hobbits fare much better when they enter the Chetwood,
following a more competent leader: “Strider guided them confidently
among the many crossing paths, although left to themselves they would
soon have been at a loss” (FR, I, xi, 194).
While trees in the second segment of the chapter are ascribed some
degree of emotion, they still do not physically move unlike Primary World
trees—not even when “just behind [the hobbits] a large branch fell from
an old overhanging tree” (FR, I, vi, 123). While effectively justifying the
hobbits’ paranoia, this event corresponds to “summer branch drop,” a
Primary World condition where large limbs break—“for no obvious reason”—from trees that seem to be healthy and stable; this is typically seen
in overmature, senescent trees, with branches that reach or extend past
the edge of the canopy (Rushforth 1). Arborists report that “summer
branch drop is serious enough for the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew to
post a large sign at each entrance warning visitors that ‘the older trees,
particularly beech and elm, are liable to shed large branches without
warning’” (Harris, Clark, and Matheny 428). Tree species reported to
experience summer branch drop in England include ash, oak, and willow—a short list comprising every named species of broadleaf tree in the
Old Forest (Harris, Clark, and Matheny 429; FR, I, vi, 125–26). Tolkien’s
succinct phrase “an old overhanging tree” aptly describes a tree that
would be prone to this condition. Thus, the only event in this chapter
that could be conceived of as a physical assault (besides the actions of
Old Man Willow) is botanically credible in the Primary World.109
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
The second segment of this chapter is marked by two shifts, the first
of which is a distinct change in tone. The Lord of the Rings contains four
specific indications that the Old Forest trees can think or feel, and the
first two occur in this chapter: the hobbits sense “the ill will of the wood”
before the large branch falls; afterward, Frodo regrets having challenged
“the menace of the trees.”7 The vague discomfort of being watched is
replaced by a direct suggestion that the wood has a vindictive will of its
own (FR, I, vi, 122–24). Trees that, earlier in the chapter, were portrayed
as belonging to the first category now take on descriptions more appropriate to the second category; in either case, the Old Forest trees have
not moved in ways that Primary World trees cannot. Besides foreshadowing Old Man Willow’s attack, this departure from the first category
shows Tolkien’s assessment that trees with emotion and intent do not
threaten “the inner consistency of reality,” because he still calls them
“trees.” These trees, which look like trees but may have powers beyond
what mortals can perceive, seem simultaneously real and enchanted,
thereby conveying the power and magic that Tolkien attributed to things
belonging to or coming from Faërie (Tolkien, Smith 74)—a quality that
augments these trees, initially portrayed as belonging to the first category,
but does not necessitate a new ontological class.
The second shift characterizing this transitional segment of the chapter is a series of rapid changes in forest density. The hobbits repeatedly
move from dense wood to sunny clearing, progressively failing to achieve
their desired direction and ultimately feeling extremely disoriented. This
confusion both provides a narrative transition to the third segment and
justifies the hobbits’ carelessness upon reaching Old Man Willow. The
hobbits are elated to exit the gloomy wood and enter the sun-drenched
valley, even though it “is said to be the queerest part of the whole wood”
(FR, I, vi, 122–26). Their relief, combined with the natural tendency to
associate enchantment only with the dense woodland interior, makes the
hobbits vulnerable to Old Man Willow.
The hobbits’ entrance into the Withywindle valley signals the third
and final segment of this chapter, where the encounter with Old Man
Willow forces Tolkien to consider a possible distinction between trees
capable of thought, emotion, or speech and those that can move in extraordinary ways (but are not ambulatory). The pattern of this segment
mirrors that of the chapter as a whole, as the initial landscape description
is entirely credible from a Primary World point of view:
A golden afternoon of late sunshine lay warm and drowsy
upon the hidden land. . . . There wound lazily a dark river
of brown water, bordered with ancient willows, arched over
with willows, blocked with fallen willows, and flecked with110
Cynthia M. Cohen
thousands of faded willow-leaves. The air was thick with
them, fluttering yellow from the branches; for there was a
warm and gentle breeze blowing softly in the valley, and the
reeds were rustling, and the willow-boughs were creaking.
(FR, I, vi, 126)
Even without Old Man Willow’s enchantments, this landscape could lure
any weary traveler to sleep: the breeze, the rustling reeds, and the sound
of moving water beneath an airy shade describe a lovely spot for a nap.
Like his surroundings, Old Man Willow is originally presented in a botanically believable (though anthropomorphic) way:
[Frodo] saw leaning over him a huge willow-tree . . . . its
sprawling branches going up like reaching arms with many
long-fingered hands, its knotted and twisted trunk gaping in
wide fissures that creaked faintly as the boughs moved. (FR,
I, vi, 127)
Once more, Tolkien’s language is consistent, describing a tree that resembles a monster: “sprawling branches going up like reaching arms” (emphasis added).
As in “The Old Forest” chapter overall, however, the “primary material” that initially resembles “the actual arrangements of the Primary
World” becomes more unlike those actual arrangements as the narrative
proceeds (MC 140). As sleep overtakes everyone but Sam, large cracks
in Old Man Willow’s trunk “[gape] wide to receive” Merry and Pippin.
This phrase, potentially describing either preexisting cavities or a trunk
moving in a way not possible in the Primary World, nudges Old Man
Willow into the third category of literary trees. Immediately, Sam senses
this change: “There’s more behind this than sun and warm air. . . . I don’t
like this great big tree. I don’t trust it.” The hobbits soon realize that this
willow does not quite fit their definition of “tree,” since it is capable of
moving in unexpected ways, striking Frodo and trapping Merry and Pippin (FR, I, vi, 127–29). Despite Old Man Willow’s extraordinary behavior, the hobbits continue to refer to him as a tree; Tolkien’s consideration
of this character as something other than a tree, however, is shown by an
analysis of Old Man Willow’s origins.
In “The Adventures of Tom Bombadil,” Old Man Willow traps Tom
Bombadil just like he traps Merry and Pippin in The Lord of the Rings
(PS 14). This poem reveals no attempt to create a believable Secondary
World, but once Tom and Old Man Willow are transplanted into The
Lord of the Rings, this point becomes crucial. The inclusion of a tree of the
third category, not only thinking and feeling but also moving in unconventional ways, forced Tolkien to consider the relative credibility of Old
Man Willow alongside the other trees of the Old Forest, which he had111
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
already implied belong to the second category of literary trees (stationary trees that can talk, think, or feel). Yet no new ontological class was
created for Old Man Willow, for “The Adventures of Tom Bombadil”
provided Tolkien with an easy solution: the poem suggests that Old Man
Willow is an entity separate from the tree. Old Man Willow asks,
“Ha, Tom Bombadil! What be you a-thinking,
peeping inside my tree, watching me a-drinking
deep in my wooden house, tickling me with feather,
dripping wet down my face like a rainy weather?”
(Bombadil 12)
Old Man Willow seems to be an entity living within or associated with
a tree—some sort of a spirit, or perhaps a Fairy. In the earliest known
draft of the Old Forest episode, Tom describes him as a “thirsty earthbound spirit [that] had become imprisoned in the greatest Willow of the
Forest.” This draft explains that “The [willow] tree did not die, though
its heart went rotten, while the malice of the Old Man drew power out
of earth and water, and spread…on both sides of the valley” (Shadow
120–21). These descriptions of Old Man Willow align with Tolkien’s
characterization of Fairies as spirits coexisting with humans, “capable of
good and evil, and possibly (in this fallen world) actually sometimes evil,”
appearing to us in human form but appearing otherwise to other beings (Tolkien On Fairy-Stories 255). In the final text of The Lord of the Rings,
Tolkien declines to specify what exactly Old Man Willow is, suggesting
that he did not find the spirit/Fairy explanation sufficient to justify Old
Man Willow’s capacity for movement. The obfuscated rewrite of Tom’s
description omits “the Old Man” as subject, ascribing heart, strength,
thought, and spirit to “the Great Willow” and identifying most of the Old
Forest trees as being “under its dominion.” Tolkien not only blurs the distinction between Old Man Willow and the other Old Forest trees; he also
maintains an ambiguity within Old Man Willow’s character that refuses
to commit him to the ranks of any one life form. By using the terms “old
Willow-man”8 and “Old Man Willow” interchangeably, Tolkien suggests
that the character could be a tree-like man, a man-like tree, or something
in between. Frodo intuits that, while Old Man Willow looks like a tree, his
actions mark him as something else altogether: “‘Tell us, Master,’ he said.
‘about the Willow-man. What is he?’” (FR, I, vii, 137–41).
Ents and Fangorn Forest
While it is tempting to claim that Tolkien invented Ents to resolve
his own ambiguity about how to handle the relative credibility of the
Old Forest trees and Old Man Willow, the distinct ontological separation
between Ents and trees was an accident of creative history, for Ents—as112
Cynthia M. Cohen
Tolkien conceived of them—initially had nothing to do with trees. Tolkien wrote that Ents “grew rather out of their name, than the other way
about. I always felt that something ought to be done about the peculiar
A[nglo] Saxon word ent for a ‘giant’ or mighty person of long ago” (Letters
208). Tolkien’s exposure to Old Norse literature and texts mentioning giants led to a coincidence of nomenclature that would determine the role
Ents assumed in The Lord of the Rings.
The term “tree-man” and the proper name “Tree-Beard” seem to
have aided Tolkien’s association of the Old English word “ent” with trees.
Edward Pettit identifies the word “trémaðr,” translated literally as “treeman,” in the Old Norse Hávamál and in Flateyjarbók (Pettit 16). The variant forms “trémann” and “trémaðrinn” occur in Ragnars Saga Loðbrókar, a text
linked to the Völsunga Saga (Grimstad 218). The Orkneyinga Saga uses the
name “Þórir tréskegg,” translated as “Thorir Treebeard” or “Thorir TreeBeard” (Pettit 17; Pálsson and Edwards 16, 31–32). Early drafts demonstrate that, as Tolkien composed The Lord of the Rings, he used the words
“Tree-men” and “Treebeard” alongside descriptions of giants, which he
associated with the Anglo-Saxon word “ent.” Figure 1 depicts how the
association of the words “Tree-men” and “Treebeard” with giants seems
to have set Tolkien’s notion of Ents as giants on course toward his conception of the Ents’ close involvement with trees. Tolkien’s only usage of
“Tree-men” outside of The Lord of the Rings appears in The Book of Lost
Tales, as a cryptic element in two lists (Lost Tales II 254, 261). This term,
lurking in Tolkien’s unconscious, may account for his later association
of giants with trees, and his transformation of what Anders Stenström
calls the “tree trope”—where an author expresses a giant’s great size by
comparison to a tree—into the notion that a giant could resemble a tree
in more ways than height (Stenstrom 60–61). Indeed, Tolkien wrote that
he “did not consciously invent [Ents] at all,” speculating that “something
had been going on in the ‘unconscious’ for some time” (Letters 211–12 n).
Tolkien had used the “tree trope” in a version of “The Tale of Tinúviel,”
revised in the early to mid-1920s, to describe the “neck of Gilim the giant” as “taller than many elm trees” (Lost Tales II 46). Stenström proposes
that when, in an early draft of The Lord of the Rings, Tolkien used this “tree
trope” and the term “Tree-Men” in the same paragraph, their juxtaposition produced a creative spark that would propel Ents toward their later
association with trees (Stenstrom 61). Sam asks “about these Tree-men,
these giants, as you might call them? They do say that one bigger than a
tree was seen” (FR, I, ii, 53). The editing process that led to that final text,
however, proves revealing, as Christopher Tolkien reports:
As my father first wrote Sam’s words, he said: ‘But what
about these what do you call ’em—giants? They do say as113
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
one nigh as big as a tower or leastways a tree was seen. . . . ’
This was changed at the time of writing to: ‘But what about
these Tree-Men, these here—giants? They do say one nigh
as big as a tower was seen,’ etc. (Shadow 254)
During that revision, the “tree-trope” was replaced with the term “TreeMen” (Stenström 61). Furthermore, Tolkien may have partly envisioned
what “Tree-men” would look like by associating the name “Treebeard”
with the lichen genus Usnea, which can be seen hanging on ancient trees
like tinsel on a Christmas tree (Purvis 56).10 Usnea species are commonly
called “beard lichens” and could be imagined as the beards of “Treemen” (Brodo, Sharnoff, and Sharnoff 95). Tolkien’s descriptions of
Treebeard’s “sweeping grey beard” as “thin and mossy at the ends” and
of other Ents with “beards grey-green as moss” support this speculation
(TT, III, iv, 66; TT, III, viii, 154).
Treebeard’s first mention (in a late 1938 draft) confirms only that
he is a giant who is hostile to Gandalf, and the notion of Treebeard as
an enemy of the Fellowship persisted (on and off) until the “Treebeard”
chapter was composed (Shadow 363, 410). In the interim (around July
1939), Tolkien decided that Treebeard—whatever his allegiance—would
resemble a tree: “what [Frodo] had thought was the stem of a monstrous
oaktree [sic] was really a thick gnarled leg with a rootlike foot and many
Figure 1. Converging trajectories for Old Man Willow and the Ents 9114
Cynthia M. Cohen
branching toes” (Shadow 384). Even at this early stage when Treebeard
was first considered tree-like, Tolkien explicitly states that Frodo was mistaken in thinking that he was a tree. In an August 1939 outline, Tolkien detailed Treebeard’s appearance, distinguishing him from trees in
the process: Treebeard is “about 50 feet high with barky skin. Hair and
beard rather like twigs. Clothed in dark green like a mail of short shining leaves. [His] . . . many thanes and followers . . . look like young trees
[?when] they stand” (Shadow 410). This outline also mentions that “the
tree-giants assail the besiegers,” providing the first recorded instance of
Ents participating in battle.
While Tolkien is—from the beginning of the final draft of the “Treebeard” chapter—consistently noncommittal about what specifically distinguishes Ents from trees, he makes it very clear that Ents and trees
constitute two distinct ontological classes. Treebeard informs Merry and
Pippin: “We are tree-herds, we old Ents” (TT, III, iv, 71). The visual presentation of this explicitly stated distinction, however, is blurry at times;
for instance, the description of morphological diversity at Entmoot
employs much tree imagery and several references to familiar Primary
World trees:
A few [Ents] . . . reminded [Merry and Pippin] of beech-trees
or oaks. . . . Some recalled the chestnut: brown-skinned Ents
with large splayfingered hands, and short thick legs. Some
recalled the ash: tall straight grey Ents with many-fingered
hands and long legs; some the fir (the tallest Ents), and others
the birch, the rowan, and the linden. (TT, III, iv, 83–84)
As in Tolkien’s early descriptions of the Old Forest, his language makes
the Ents seem like trees without ever conceding that they are trees: “A few
. . . reminded them of beech-trees or oaks,” “Some recalled the chestnut,”
“Some recalled the ash” (emphasis added). Now, however, he refers directly
to legs, arms, and other body parts rather than employing anthropomorphic metaphors like those applied to Old Man Willow (FR, I, vi, 144).
While Tolkien never describes his ambulatory trees as conscious manifestations of familiar tree species (as Holberg and MacDonald do), he does
seem to intentionally blur the visual boundaries between Ents and trees.
Although Treebeard always distinguishes between trees and Ents, even
he cannot pinpoint their differences: he says that some of the Ents are
“going tree-ish,” and a few of the trees are “getting Entish.” (TT, III, iv,
71). The “-ish” suffixes that Treebeard uses may be viewed as consistent
with other vague language comparing trees and Ents without equating
them to one another, and with the ambiguous language employed in
“The Old Forest” chapter. This interpretation shows that, while Tolkien had envisioned these ambulatory, tree-like beings as different from115
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
all other trees, he had some trouble explaining the relationship between
Ents and trees as two separate ontological classes. After all, the organic
evolution of Ents, by the time they emerged as tree-herds, afforded them
the odd distinction of looking like trees, being associated with trees, living
among trees, and being charged with the responsibility to protect trees,
but not actually being trees—a situation not imagined in literature before
Tolkien’s time.
Although Ents look enough like trees that characters unaware of
their existence mistake them for trees, the differences are clearer when
Ents and trees are physically separated. Merry and Pippin first see Treebeard in the open; they see “one old stump of a tree with only two bent
branches left: it looked almost like the figure of some gnarled old man,
standing there, blinking.” The text’s first proper description of Treebeard
cannot be mistaken for a tree: “Man-like, almost Troll-like,” he has a distinct head with a face, a beard, and remarkable eyes as well as arms, feet,
and toes (TT, III, iv, 65–66). Once the roused Ents strike out for Isengard, they are markedly distinguished from the trees in the area, which,
in response to the Ents’ “great ringing shout: ra-hoom-rah!...quivered and
bent as if a gust had struck them.” The ensuing scene is defined by action of which trees—in both the Primary and Secondary Worlds—are
incapable:
The Ents were swinging along with great strides down the
slope. . . . Treebeard was at their head, and some fifty followers were behind him, two abreast, keeping step with their
feet and beating time with their hands upon their flanks. (TT,
III, iv, 88)
Riding through the nameless wood at Helm’s Deep, Legolas senses something odd about the trees but sees nothing unusual until the company
exits the wood. Looking back, he sees three strange, tall shapes emerge
from the trees; soon joined by others of their kind, they all walk back into
the wood and disappear (TT, III, viii, 154–55). Besides being physically
obstructed from view, the Ents also seem to vanish once they stand amid
the wood, relatively indiscernible in the context of trees.
While Ents have much in common with trees, they are equally—if
not more—like people. Besides the physical traits that trees lack (eyes,
human-like appendages, and digits) and the ability to walk upright, Ents
demonstrate cultural development, evident in their linguistic prowess
and in the system of government followed at Entmoot (TT, III, iv, 66; RK,
Appendix F, I, 408–09; TT, III, iv, 82–86). The memory of the presence
of Entwives and Entings demonstrates not only that Ents have family
structure, but also that they experience love, disagreement, and longing.
Expressed in songs, chants, and poems, these emotions are captured in116
Cynthia M. Cohen
a body of literature that further asserts the human side of Ents, exemplified by the song of the Ent and the Entwife (TT, III, iv, 80). Despite
their differing perspectives toward nature recorded in this song, the lives
of both genders, together constituting their own ontological class, are
inextricably tied to trees.
Unraveling the Mystery of Huorns
The nearly extemporaneous composition of the “Treebeard” chapter marks the merging of the two separate trajectories (Figure 1) that
distinguished the development of trees of the first, second, and third categories (trees that do nothing unusual; trees that can talk, think, or feel;
and trees that remain rooted but can independently move branches or
trunk) from trees of the fourth type (ambulatory trees) (Letters 231; Treason
411). This event seems to have resulted in Tolkien’s conscious recognition that ambulatory trees are too “unlike…the actual arrangements of
the Primary World,” as the Huorns that arise shortly thereafter in drafts
of The Lord of the Rings are imagined with particular care not to rupture
“the inner consistency of reality” (MC 140). While Tolkien had wanted
to portray trees in battle, his ultimate portrayal of Ents was insufficient
for this purpose: they were tree-herds, not trees, and there were too few
of them to present a threat (Letters 212 n; TT, III, iv, 78). Still wishing to
include an arboreal army in the narrative, Tolkien now consciously asks:
At what point can a tree no longer be called a “tree”? Sharing with Ents
the ability to walk but lacking their capacity for culture, the ambiguous
Huorns suggest that Tolkien never resolved whether physical mobility
alone was enough to justify a separate ontological class. Yet the Huorns’
narrative evolution and their representation in the final text demonstrate
that Tolkien had been forced to consider whether or not they could realistically be called “trees.”
Tolkien’s early ideas about whom or what the Ents would lead into
battle span the second and fourth categories of literary trees, characterized by an ability to speak but also able to move from place to place. In
the earliest published version of the Ents’ attack on Isengard, Tolkien had
already determined that the trees the Ents would lead into battle should
be no ordinary trees: they enter the narrative with a name—“Galbedirs
(Talking Trees).” A series of revisions follows, not possible to place in
precise chronological order. On one draft, Tolkien writes: “The Ents sent
a force of walking trees (with split trunks).” Another draft shows evolving
nomenclature, from Galbedirs to Lamorni and then Ornómar, the name
glossed as “an old-fashioned Elvish” word for “Talking Trees…that
[Ents] have trained and made half-entish.” Despite the later omission of
the phrase “Talking Trees,” the idea that Ents taught trees to talk persists
in a later draft as “trees with voices . . . that the Ents have trained . . . though
117
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
far wilder . . . and crueller.” Wording much like the final text replaced the
“trees with voices” passage (which “was rejected, probably at once,” according to Christopher Tolkien), and the name then changed from Ornómi
to Huorns. No longer suggesting that Ents have trained Huorns to be less
tree-like, Tolkien intentionally obfuscates the nature of the relationship
in this revision: Merry reports that he “cannot make out whether they
are trees that have become Entish, or Ents that have become tree-like, or
both” (War 47–56). In the final text, Merry speculates that Huorns “are
Ents that have become almost like trees” (TT, III, ix, 170). The textual
history of these passages confirms that Tolkien struggled with the issues
of what sort of beings the Ents would lead into battle, what they would
be capable of, and how they would have become that way. In the finished
work, the reader is led to believe that Huorns may be trees, Ents, or
something else, revealing Tolkien’s uncertainty about how much trees
could differ from “the actual arrangements of the Primary World” before
threatening “the inner consistency of reality” (MC 140).
The purpose, nature, and narrative origin of Huorns are further
complicated by the characterization of Huorns as cruel, wild, dark, and
dangerous. Most interpretations outside of The Lord of the Rings—including Tolkien’s description of Fangorn Forest as “tense with hostility
because it was threatened by a machine-loving enemy”—cite a desire
for revenge akin to the second- and third-category Old Forest trees (Letters 420). While such revenge is justified by Saruman’s reckless felling of
trees, Treebeard suggests another explanation: that “the Great Darkness,” which Wayne G. Hammond and Christina Scull define as “the
time of [Melkor’s] domination of Middle-earth,” still lingers in Fangorn
Forest (384; TT, III, iv, 71 and 77). Treebeard’s suggestion, more malevolent and less concrete than any possible physical threat to trees, is
supported by a scene late in the narrative, when the defeat of Sauron
causes the Great Darkness to lift from the depths of Fangorn Forest. As
the Fellowship disbands, Legolas plans to “visit the deep places of the
Entwood,” and Treebeard’s open invitation to travelers indicates there is
nothing there to fear (RK, VI, vi, 259). The ambiguous attribution of the
Huorns’ emotion further obscures their mode of being: Huorns driven
by vengeance would be intrinsically capable of emotion, but Huorns
made cruel by the Great Darkness would be non-sentient trees given the
capacity to feel by an outside source.
Precisely how Huorns move is also largely unexplained. Although
Huorns are unquestionably ambulatory, descriptions of Huorns in motion are invariably mysterious, characterized by diffuse, untraceable
sounds: rustling and creaking, “a noise like a rushing wind,” and “whisperings and groanings and an endless rustling sigh” (TT, III, ix, 170–71;
TT, III, viii, 158). Moving Huorns are also communicated through sights118
Cynthia M. Cohen
obscured or obstructed, such as an absent moon, a “darkness blacker
than the night,” a gathering mist, and “moving towers of shadow” (TT,
III, viii, 158). Yet Huorns, standing still, are inevitably mistaken for trees.
Legolas, one of the most arboriculturally savvy characters in The Lord
of the Rings, is baffled in the presence of standing Huorns; he calls them
“the strangest trees that ever [he] saw” (TT, III, viii, 152). The text’s only
detailed physical description of Huorns, while grotesque and ominous,
still depicts trees that could exist in the Primary World (TT, III, viii, 151):
“Long sweeping boughs [that hang] down like searching fingers” could
occur on any number of tree species with a pendulous branching habit,
such as the weeping willow hybrid that thrives in Britain (Salix × sepulcralis nv. chrysoloma) or the pendulous beech (Fagus sylvatica ‘Pendula’), an
impressive specimen of which stands in Oxford’s University Parks (Miles
192; Günther 239). “Roots [that stand] up from the ground like the limbs
of strange monsters” are generally termed aerial or adventitious roots
when found on Primary World trees, occurring partially above ground
and functioning like snorkels to facilitate root respiration in submerged
conditions; the roots become visible if the standing water subsides
(Thomas 103–07). The aerial stilt roots of the mangrove (Rhizophora species), for example, originate on the trunk several feet above ground and
often branch as they approach the soil surface, sometimes resembling a
creature with many legs and long toes (Menninger 27–34). Therefore,
Huorns look essentially like trees, except when they are in motion; yet
the absence of visual descriptions of motion maintains the overall notion
of a tree-like appearance. Since these beings that look like trees are never
actually seen moving—not by the reader, nor by any character (besides
perhaps the Ents)—the “inner consistency of reality” is preserved.
The name that Tolkien finally chose for these beings reflects the Huorns’ ambiguous portrait: while the second syllable, “-orn,” unequivocally
refers to some kind of tree,11 “Hu-” defies precise definition. Although
scholarly discussion of the etymology of “Hu-” has yielded only speculative conclusions, there is a general consensus that the meaning of “Hu-”
relates to the Huorns’ ability to speak; unpublished notes by Tolkien similarly suggest a possible derivation from the base KHUG- “bark, bay”
(Wynne; Hammond and Scull 425). The combination of the mysterious
“Hu-” and the unambiguous tree-element “-orn” conveys exactly what
Tolkien endeavored to express about these tree-like beings: Huorns have
some relationship with trees, and might even be trees, but the reader of
The Lord of the Rings will never know their specific nature. By obfuscating
the degree to which Huorns differ from “the actual arrangements of
[trees in] the Primary World,” Tolkien manages to maintain “the inner
consistency of reality” (MC 140).119
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
IV. The Functions of Fantasy
By representing trees in this way, Tolkien provides recovery, escape,
and consolation; these functions, in turn, coalesce into a purposeful
message (MC 145). As readers tend not to perceive the differentiation
of trees, Ents, and Huorns that is explored in this article, the general
impression readers have of trees in The Lord of the Rings is that they can
defend themselves. Pointing back to the underlying truth that trees in the
Primary World are relatively helpless, this impression provides consolation, allowing escape to a Secondary World where trees do have their
own means of defense (MC 155). Furthermore, Tolkien’s usage of treelike beings with human-like characteristics and culture reminds us that,
in the Primary World, people are the only real defense that trees have
against most of the modern threats that they face. The very thing that
most readers do not notice in The Lord of the Rings—the distinction between trees and tree-like beings, and the convincing portrayal of both
life forms—creates a space where regular trees can function significantly
within the narrative without exceeding the physical limits of their Primary World counterparts. By making trees of the first category significant
in the narrative, Tolkien enables a sense of recovery, allowing his readers
to see trees—which, for many of us, have become all too familiar—in a
vivid, new light (MC 146). Portraying trees as something worth fighting
for and asserting the connections that exist between humans and trees,
Tolkien compels his readers to become responsible for preserving and
protecting the trees in their own lives.
NOTES
1 Although Tolkien considered this story a “nearly perfect tale” in the
1930s, a critical re-reading in 1964 “filled [him] with distaste” (Tolkien
On Fairy-Stories 250; Tolkien, Smith 69). MacDonald’s Phantastes “afflicted [Tolkien] with profound dislike” (Smith 69).
2 Arthur Rackham partly inspired Tolkien’s conception of Old Man
Willow (Carpenter, Biography 165).
3 While Tolkien probably never saw “the grandest stand of holly in
Britain” (in Staverton Park), he may have seen large hollies in Sutton
Coldfield Park or the Stiperstones in Shropshire, both near Birmingham (Rackham, Ancient Woodland 347; Rackham, Trees and Woodland
134, 161; Miles 159). Other potentially accessible large hollies were
documented during Tolkien’s lifetime in Warwickshire, Yorkshire,
Cornwall, and the Chiltern Hills (Loudon 515; Dallimore 40; Elwes
and Henry 1717).120
Cynthia M. Cohen
4 Within The Lord of the Rings, these trees are called “the White Tree
and the Golden” and “the Trees of Silver and Gold,” and separate
mentions of “the Silver Tree” and “Laurelin the Golden” imply the
corollary names “the Golden Tree” and “Telperion the Silver” (or
“the White”) (TT, III, xi, 204; TT, IV, iii, 252; TT, III, ii, 25; RK, Appendix A, I, i, 314).
5 Tolkien’s awareness of botanical relationships at the family level (e.g.,
Rosaceae) is confirmed by Quickbeam’s unrelated reference to rowan
as part of “the people of the Rose” (TT, III, iv, 87).
6 Tolkien may have known of the “mummy seeds” collected from ancient Egyptian graves, which people thought might still be capable of
germination. During Tolkien’s lifetime, many respectable scientists
supported this theory; while the notion is refuted today, the popularity of this tale persists (Kesseler and Stuppy 163).
7 In successive chapters, Tom Bombadil “[lays] bare the hearts of trees
and their thoughts,” describing them as “filled . . . with pride and
rooted wisdom, and with malice,” and Treebeard speculates that
“bad memories are handed down” (FR, I, vii, 141; TT, III, iv, 71).
8 Tolkien may have derived this name from “The Willow-Man” by
Juliana Horatia Ewing, published first in Aunt Judy’s Magazine (1872)
and later as one of two poems in Tongues in Trees (1884), a book of
verses intended for children (Laski 100). The subject of this poem
belongs in the second category of literary trees.
9 A: 1934 (Scull and Hammond, Chronology 173; early 1938 (Scull and
Hammond, Chronology 210, 221; Shadow 110–113, 302, 327–29);
1941–42 (Treason 411); 1942–44 (War 16–17, 27–30, 42–56, 77–78);
1954 (Scull and Hammond, Chronology 444). B: 1916–17 (Lost Tales I
1; Lost Tales II 254, 261); mid-1938 (Scull and Hammond, Chronology
220; Shadow 254); late 1938 (Scull and Hammond, Chronology 222;
Shadow 363); 1939 (Treason 210; Shadow 410); 1940 (Treason 71).
10 One sense of the OED definition of “tree-beard” is “the lichen Usnea
barbata,” which Tolkien may have seen in the Swiss Alps (470; Scull
and Hammond, Chronology 27; Black 39). Although rare in England
today, large specimens of Usnea were common there in the mid- to
late nineteenth century (Balfour 545).
11 The names mallorn, Fangorn, Celeborn (the White Tree), and Hírilorn are consistent with Tolkien’s translations of “orne” and “-orn”
(Letters 308; Lost Road 379; S 172). The nomenclature of two trees
still found in England corroborate this meaning: manna ash (Fraxinus121
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
ornus, formerly called Ornus europaea) and rowan, for which Ornus was
once a recorded common name (Campbell-Culver 6, 88, 107).
WORKS CITED
Balfour, John Hutton. A Manual of Botany. Edinburgh: Adam and Charles
Black, 1863.
Baum, L. Frank. The Annotated Wizard of Oz: The Wonderful Wizard of Oz.
Ed. Michael Patrick Hearn. Centennial ed. New York: Norton,
2000.
Black, C. B. Guide to Switzerland and the Italian Lakes. Edinburgh: Adam and
Charles Black, 1876.
Boitani, Piero. “Chaucer and Lists of Trees.” Reading Medieval Studies:
Annual Proceedings of the Graduate Centre for Medieval Studies in the
University of Reading. Ed. John Norton-Smith and Peter Noble.
Reading, Eng.: The Centre, 1976: 28–44.
Brodo, Irwin M., Sylvia Duran Sharnoff, and Stephen Sharnoff. Lichens
of North America. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2001.
Campbell-Culver, Maggie. A Passion for Trees: The Legacy of John Evelyn.
London: Eden Project Books, 2006.
Carpenter, Humphrey. Tolkien: A Biography. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
1987.
Chesterton, G. K. “The Tree of Pride.” Daylight and Nightmare: Uncollected
Stories and Fables. Comp. Marie Smith. London: Xanadu, 1986:
58–59. [Originally published in 1922.]
Costello, Laurence R., Edward J. Perry, Nelda P. Matheny, J. Michael
Henry, and Pamela M. Geisel. Abiotic Disorders of Landscape Plants:
A Diagnostic Guide. Publication 3420. Oakland, CA: University
of California, Agriculture and Natural Resources, 2003.
Dallimore, W. Holly, Yew and Box. London: John Lane, 1908.
Edlin, H. L. British Woodland Trees. London: Batsford, 1945.
Elwes, Henry John, and Augustine Henry. The Trees of Great Britain and
Ireland. Edinburgh: Privately printed, 1913. Vol. 7. 7 vols. 1906–
1913.
Ewing, Juliana Horatia. Tongues in Trees. London: Society for Promoting
Christian Knowledge, 1884.122
Cynthia M. Cohen
Finseth, Claudia Riiff. “Tolkien’s Trees.” Mallorn 35 (1997): 37–44.
Flieger, Verlyn. “Taking the Part of Trees: Eco-Conflict in MiddleEarth.” J.R.R. Tolkien and His Literary Resonances. Ed. George
Clark and Daniel Timmons. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press,
2000: 147–58.
Ford, Patrick K., trans. “Cad Goddeu.” The Mabinogi and other Medieval
Welsh Tales. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977: 183–
87.
Grimstad, Kaaren. Rev. of Studies in Ragnars Saga Loðbrókar and Its Major Scandinavian Analogues, by Rory McTurk. Speculum 69 (1994):
218–20.
Günther, R. T. Oxford Gardens. Based upon Daubeny’s Popular Guide to the Physick Garden of Oxford. With Notes on the Gardens of the Colleges and on
the University Park. Oxford: Parker and Son, 1912.
Hamilton, James. Arthur Rackham. New York: Arcade, 1990.
Hammond, Wayne G., and Christina Scull. The Lord of the Rings: A Reader’s Companion. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2005.
Harris, Richard W., James R. Clark, and Nelda P. Matheny. Arboriculture:
Integrated Management of Landscape Trees, Shrubs, and Vines. 4th ed.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004.
Haycock, Marged. “The Significance of the ‘Cad Goddau’ [sic] TreeList in the Book of Taliesin.” Celtic Linguistics: Ieithyddiaeth Geltaidd: Readings in the Brythonic Languages. Ed. Martin J. Ball, et al.
Amsterdam Studies in the Theory and History of Linguistic
Science IV: Current Issues in Linguistic Theory. Amsterdam: J.
Benjamins,1990: 297–331.
Hazell, Dinah. The Plants of Middle-Earth: Botany and Sub-Creation. Kent,
OH: Kent State University Press, 2006.
Holberg, Ludvig. The Journey of Niels Klim to the World Underground. 1742.
Ed. James I. McNelis, Jr. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska
Press, 1960.
Howard, Alexander L. Trees in Britain. London: Collins, 1946.
Johnson, Owen, and David More, eds. Tree Guide: The Most Complete Field
Guide to the Trees of Britain and Europe. London: Collins, 2004.
Jones, Leslie Ellen. Myth and Middle-Earth. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold
Spring Press, 2002.123
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
Kesseler, Rob, and Wolfgang Stuppy. Seeds: Time Capsules of Life. Ed. Alexandra Papadakis. Buffalo, NY: Firefly Books, 2006.
Laski, Marghanita. Mrs. Ewing, Mrs. Molesworth, and Mrs. Hodgson Burnett.
London: Arthur Barker, 1950.
Lewis, C. S. The Magician’s Nephew. New York: Scholastic, 1995. [Originally published in 1955.]
———. Prince Caspian. New York: Scholastic, 1995. [Originally published
in 1951.]
Lewis, W. H., and Walter Hooper, eds. Letters of C. S. Lewis. Revised Harvest ed. San Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace, 1993.
Lindsay, David. A Voyage to Arcturus. New York: Ballantine, 1968.
Loudon, J. C. Arboretum Et Fruticetum Britannicum; or, The Trees and Shrubs of
Britain, Native and Foreign, Hardy and Half-Hardy, Pictorially and Botanically Delineated, and Scientifically and Popularly Described. London:
J. C. Loudon, 1844. Vol. 2. 8 vols.
MacDonald, George. The Golden Key. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1968. [Originally published in 1867.]
———. Phantastes. New York: Schocken, 1982. [Originally published in
1858.]
Menninger, Edwin A. Fantastic Trees. Portland, OR: Timber Press, 1995.
[Originally published in 1967.]
Miles, Archie. Silva: The Tree in Britain. London: Ebury Press, 1999.
Morse, Richard. A Book of Common Trees. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1942.
Moseley, C. W. R. D., trans. The Travels of Sir John Mandeville. New York:
Penguin, 1983.
Pálsson, Hermann, and Paul Edwards, trans. Orkneyinga Saga: The History
of the Earls of Orkney. London: Hogarth, 1978.
Patch, Howard Rollin. The Other World. New York: Octagon Books, 1970.
[Originally published in 1950.]
Pettit, Edward. “Treebeard’s Roots in Medieval European Tradition.”
Mallorn 42 (2004): 11–18.
Petty, Anne C. Tolkien in the Land of Heroes: Discovering the Human Spirit. Cold
Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Press, 2003.124
Cynthia M. Cohen
Porteous, Alexander. The Forest in Folklore and Mythology. New York: Dover,
2002. [Originally published in 1928.]
Purvis, William. Lichens. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press,
2000.
Rackham, Oliver. Ancient Woodland: Its History, Vegetation and Uses in England. London: Edward Arnold, 1980.
———. Trees and Woodland in the British Landscape: The Complete History of
Britain’s Trees, Woods and Hedgerows. Revised ed. London: Phoenix
Press, 2001.
Rane, Karen, and Nancy Pataky. “Managing Infectious Plant Diseases.”
Plant Health Care for Woody Ornamentals. Ed. John Lloyd. Illinois:
International Society of Arboriculture (Savoy, IL) and Cooperative Extension Service; College of Agricultural, Consumer,
and Environmental Sciences; University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign; 1997: 77–106.
Read, Helen. Veteran Trees: A Guide to Good Management. Peterborough,
Eng.: Northminster House, 2000.
Root, Robert Kilburn. “Chaucer’s Dares.” Modern Philology 15 (1917):
1–22.
Rushforth, K. D. “Summer Branch Drop.” Arboricultural Research Note. UK
Department of the Environment, Forestry Commission. Dec.
1979: 1–2.
Russell, Beth. “Botanical Notes on the Mallorn.” Mallorn 43 (2005): 20–
22.
Schopmeyer, C. S., ed. Seeds of Woody Plants in the United States. Agriculture
Handbook No. 450. Washington, DC: Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1974.
Scull, Christina, and Wayne G. Hammond. The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion
and Guide: Chronology. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006.
———. The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion and Guide: Reader’s Guide. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 2006.
Simpson, Michael, trans. The Metamorphoses of Ovid. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press, 2001.
Stenström, Anders. “Some Notes on Giants in Tolkien’s Writings.” Scholarship and Fantasy: Proceedings of the Tolkien Phenomenon. Ed. K. J.
Battarbee. Turku, Finland: University of Turku, 1993: 53–71.125
The Unique Representation of Trees in The Lord of the Rings
Stern, Kingsley R. Introductory Plant Biology. 5th ed. Dubuque, IA: Wm. C.
Brown Publishers, 1991.
Sutton, David. Trees of Britain and Europe. London: Kingfisher, 2002.
[Originally published in 1990.]
Thomas, Peter. Trees: Their Natural History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Tolkien, J.R.R. “Nomenclature of The Lord of the Rings.” The Lord of the
Rings: A Reader’s Companion. Wayne G. Hammond and Christina
Scull. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2005: 750–82.
———. Smith of Wootton Major. Extended ed. Ed. Verlyn Flieger. London:
HarperCollins Publishers, 2005.
———. Tolkien on Fairy-Stories. Expanded ed. Ed. Verlyn Flieger and
Douglas A. Anderson. London: HarperCollins Publishers,
2008.
Tolkien, J.R.R., trans. Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl and Sir Orfeo.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1975.
“Tree.” The Oxford English Dictionary. 2nd ed. 1989.
White, T. H. The Sword in the Stone. New York: Putnam, 1939.
Wynne, Patrick H. “_Huorn_.” Online posting. 8 August 2003. Lambengolmor. 15 February 2008. <http://tech.groups.yahoo.
com/group/lambengolmor/message/470>.127
Copyright © West Virginia University Press
Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influence:
Swerving from and Completing
George MacDonald
JOSH LONG
In 1973, the year J.R.R. Tolkien passed away, Harold Bloom released his seminal work The Anxiety of Influence: A Theory of Poetry. Although
Bloom’s book has had a profound effect on the topic of literary influence,
his theory has received minimal attention within the field of Tolkien
studies. Faye Ringel takes a Bloomian approach in her article “Women
Fantasists: In the Shadow of the Ring,” though, ultimately, her article
focuses primarily on those whom Tolkien influenced. Diana Glyer also
considers The Anxiety of Influence in the final chapter of her book-length
study The Company They Keep: C. S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien as Writers in
Community; however, she is more interested in expanding the notion of
literary influence rather than evaluating how Tolkien’s fiction fits into
Bloom’s paradigm. This article serves to demonstrate that Bloom’s theory is relevant to both Tolkien’s creative journey in general and Smith of
Wootton Major in particular.
In The Anxiety of Influence, Bloom develops six revisionary ratios—
ways in which one poet influences another. I am only interested in the
first two—clinamen and tessera. The former might be best described as a
corrective swerve, a turning away from a precursor poet in attempt to
correct what he did wrong; the latter is antithetical completion, which
occurs when a poet retains a precursor’s terms but means them in a different way (Bloom 14).
These revisionary ratios are performed by a poet as a means “to clear
imaginative space for” himself (Bloom 5). As the modern writer (postEnlightenment) seeks to achieve literary greatness, he inevitably becomes
anxious over influence and, consequently, reacts to his literary precursor.
Through a revisionary movement in his own text, the writer is able to
create something original and thus pacify his fear of indebtedness. At the
heart of Bloom’s theory is this idea: “The history of fruitful poetic influence,
which is to say the main tradition of Western poetry since the Renaissance, is a history of anxiety and self-saving caricature, of distortion, of perverse, wilful revisionism
without which modern poetry as such could not exist” (30, emphasis in original).
In Smith, Tolkien sought to correctively swerve from and antithetically
complete MacDonald’s The Golden Key.
The Unfinished Preface to The Golden Key
When Tolkien began Smith in late 1964, he was not intending to128
Josh Long
write a story about Faërie. In fact, he was not even initially trying to tell
a tale; the story arose almost accidentally.1 It began with a simple request
from a publisher. Pantheon Books of New York inquired on 2 September
1964 whether Tolkien would write a preface to a new edition of George
MacDonald’s The Golden Key. Tolkien responded to their query on 7 September: “I should like to write a short preface to a separate edition of The
Golden Key. I am not as warm an admirer of George MacDonald as C. S.
Lewis was; but I do think well of this story of his” (Letters 351). Though
Tolkien had supervised a B.Litt. thesis on MacDonald in 1934 and may
have reread him in 1938 or 1939 while working on “On Fairy-stories,”
he had almost certainly not read MacDonald for nearly three decades..2
Therefore, when he accepted the request from Pantheon books to write
a preface to The Golden Key, he was basing his decision largely on the fact
that he had praised the story in “On Fairy-stories.” In actuality, he only
had vague memories of what it was really like.
After rereading The Golden Key, Tolkien discovered that he did not
like it at all. According to Carpenter, Tolkien claimed that it was “illwritten, incoherent, and bad, in spite of a few memorable passages”
(quoted in Biography 244). Elsewhere, he stated that “re-reading G[eorge]
M[acDonald] critically filled me with distaste” (Smith 69).3 In spite of
these misgivings, he persisted in trying to write a preface:
A fairy tale is a tale about that world, a glimpse of it; if you
read it, you enter Fairy with the author as your guide. He
may be a bad guide or a good one: bad if he does not take
the adventure seriously, and is just ‘spinning a yarn’ which
he thinks is good enough ‘for children’; good, if he knows
something about Fairy, and has himself caught some glimpses of it which he is trying to put into words. But Fairy is very
powerful. Even the bad guide cannot escape it. He probably
makes up his tale out of bits of older tales, or things he half
remembers, and they may be too strong for him to spoil or
disenchant. (Smith 74-5)
Tolkien’s tone is slightly cynical, if not critical. He was struggling to write
a preface for a book and an author he now disliked; his contempt seeps
into his prose. Surely, Tolkien considered MacDonald a “bad guide”;
however, this view would not be made plain until the actual story of
Smith.
The Negative Influence of MacDonald4
Understandably, Tolkien never completed his preface to The Golden
Key. He abandoned it because he had lost interest in MacDonald and
found a story of his own beginning to unfold. Tolkien notes, “If I had129
Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influence
gone on [writing the preface] I should only have written a severely critical or ‘anti’ essay on G[eorge] M[acDonald]—unnecessary, and a pity
since G[eorge] M[acDonald] has performed great services for other
minds—such as Jack’s” ((Smith 69).5 Although the ‘anti’ essay was never
written, Smith undoubtedly became charged with Tolkien’s feelings of
deep resentment and discontent over MacDonald’s stories—particularly
The Golden Key.
On at least two separate occasions, Tolkien acknowledged MacDonald’s negative influence on Smith. On 26 October 1966, Tolkien read Smith
aloud at Blackfriars, the Dominican house of studies in St. Giles, Oxford.
In his prefatory comments, he remarked, “The story was (as often happens) the result of an irritant. And since the irritant will in some degree
affect the presentation of the movement in the mind that it sets going
I will just say what the irritant was in this case. George MacDonald. A
writer for whom I have a sincere and humble—dislike” (quoted in Scull
and Hammond, Reader’s Guide 945). Additionally, in writing to Clyde S.
Kilby, Tolkien called Smith “an anti-G[eorge] M[acDonald] tract” (Smith
70). Inevitably, Tolkien was so dissatisfied with MacDonald that he felt
compelled to write a reactionary story to The Golden Key.
What was it that bothered him so much about MacDonald’s writing? First, Tolkien was dissatisfied with the The Golden Key’s tone; he felt
that fairy tales shouldn’t be written with children in mind. MacDonald
had inevitably succumbed to this “error of false sentiment” (MC 130)
In a note he sent to Kilby, he observes, “I had of course, never thought
of The G[olden] K[ey] as a story for children,” but then adds this parenthetical jab, “(though apparently G[eorge] McD[onald] did)” (Smith 69).6
Tolkien’s attitude is further emphasized by the fact that on 2 March 1966,
he told Henry Resnik: “I didn’t write [The Lord of the Rings] for children.
That’s why I don’t like George MacDonald very much; he’s a horrible old
grandmother” (Resnik 41).7 Second, he felt MacDonald had a tendency
to ruin his fairy tales by being overly didactic—they came off more as
sermons than stories. Kilby recalls, “He called him an ‘old grandmother’
who preached instead of writing” (Tolkien 31). Tolkien mentioned this
less hostilely in his unfinished preface to The Golden Key, “All the same I
must warn you that [MacDonald] is a preacher, not only on the platform
or in the pulpit; in all his many books he preaches” (Smith 71). Finally,
Tolkien was also displeased that MacDonald wrote allegories—a form
he inherently disliked. Tolkien explains,“But [C. S. Lewis] was evidently
born loving (moral) allegory, and I was born with an instinctive distaste
for it. ‘Phantastes’ [by MacDonald] wakened him, and afflicted me with
profound dislike” (Smith 69).8130
Josh Long
Clinamen: The Corrective Swerve
Despite Tolkien’s praise of The Golden Key, he now saw MacDonald’s
story as a flawed and ineffective work, and as it was, he was determined
to rewrite it the way he felt it should have been written. In part, this is
what he tried to accomplish through Smith. Bloom notes,
A poet swerves away from his precursor, by so reading his
precursor’s poem as to execute a clinamen in relation to it.
This appears as a corrective movement in his own poem,
which implies that the precursor poem went accurately up
to a certain point, but then should have swerved, precisely in
the direction that the new poem moves. (14)
This is an accurate description of writing Smith. Tolkien believed MacDonald’s story “went accurately up to a certain point,” but when MacDonald should have been concerned with the integrity of Faërie, he fell
to “juvenilizing,” moralizing, and allegorizing it.
What MacDonald did right, however, was that he attempted stories
about the fantastical. Regardless of how distasteful Tolkien now found his
approach to Faërie, he valued the basic structure of The Golden Key. After
all, Smith and The Golden Key contain very similar plots—a character or
characters journey throughout an enchanted Otherworld. Consequently,
MacDonald was the immediate influence that prompted Tolkien to write
a fairy tale in which a human comes into contact with Faërie.
Correcting the Juvenility
Tolkien was not necessarily opposed to what MacDonald was doing
but how he was doing it. He was bothered by the superfluous asides found
in The Golden Key that were intended to help children follow the storyline,
keep them engaged, or teach them. We know that Smith was not written
with children in mind. Tolkien made this plain: “But the little tale was (of
course) not intended for children!” (Letters 388-9). This conviction about
fairy tales—that they “should not be specially associated with children”—
was an idea he first proposed in “On Fairy-Stories” (MC 135), and it
greatly affected his approach in The Lord of the Rings.9 It was, however, in
Smith that Tolkien made his most adamant pronouncement that the fairy
tale is really an adult genre.
The first indication of Tolkien’s clinamen can be found in the opening
sentence of the story. Like The Golden Key, Smith begins quite traditionally,
yet it establishes a very different tone than MacDonald’s story.
Smith: “There was a village once, not very long ago for those
with long memories, nor very far away for those with long
legs.” (5)131
Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influence
The Golden Key: “There was a boy who used to sit in the twilight and listen to his great-aunt’s stories.” (1)
At first glance, the two sentences appear alike; however, each author has
a different audience in mind. In The Golden Key, Mossy listens to his aunt’s
story-telling just as many children first hear The Golden Key read aloud. In
this way, MacDonald is able to establish sympathy between his juvenile
audience and the protagonist of the story. In addition, MacDonald assumes that his audience has little patience for an opening setting because
he advances directly into the story.
Tolkien’s approach is wholly different and intended for a more mature reader. His narrative begins with wordplay; the word long is used
to refer to a duration of time, extended mental capacities, and height.
Though an inexperienced reader might grow confused, to an adult, the
sentence is intriguing and engaging. Moreover, the parallelism makes the
sentence syntactically lucid, and the alliteration and consonance makes
it dictionally graceful. “There was a village once, not very long ago for
those with long memories, nor very far away for those with long legs”
(5). What is more, unlike MacDonald, Tolkien develops an opening setting; in typical Tolkienian fashion, he spends three paragraphs discussing the workings of Wootton Major before he even mentions the first
character (5-7). Smith and The Golden Key are initially distinct. As we move
through both narratives, the differences between the two texts become
even more pronounced.
Whether The Golden Key was originally written for children is less important than the fact that it appears to be. MacDonald assists the child
by indicating that he is shifting scenes. “And now I will go back to the
borders of the forest” (10). Such an interpolation is unnecessary. An adult
could figure this out for himself, but such a shift would be more difficult
for a young reader to make. The Golden Key also contains childish questions. After Mossy finds the golden key, the narrator asks, “Where was
the lock to which the key belonged? It must be somewhere, for how could
anybody be so silly as make a key for which there was no lock? Where
should he go to look for it?” (9). MacDonald is obviously trying to draw in
the young reader, but to an adult, such questions are patronizing.
The intrusive narrator also takes on more of a didactic approach. He
is decidedly concerned with Mossy and Tangle’s hygienic practices. The
morning after Tangle is first cleansed by Grandmother, he observes, “For
having once been in her grandmother’s pond, [Tangle] must be clean
and tidy ever after; and, having put on her green dress, felt like a lady”
(28). As if the narrator’s emphasis on routine bathing is not enough, he
takes it one step further by teaching his readers a lesson on altruism. “But
the wearer of Grandmother’s clothes never thinks about how he or she132
Josh Long
looks, but thinks always how handsome other people are” (33). We begin
to see why Tolkien referred to MacDonald as a grandmother.
Tolkien, unlike MacDonald, is not interested in the child as reader,
and this can be seen most clearly in his visions of Faery. They are baffling
for an adult, let alone a child. Verlyn Flieger provides an accurate assessment of the enigmatic nature of these visions: “Wandering in myth he
does not understand, Smith of Wootton Major witnesses a whole world
to which he does not have the key; nor, in consequence, does the reader.
. . . The questions are not just unanswered, they are unasked” (196).
Indeed, Tolkien’s portrayal of Faery remains so mysterious that when
Tolkien swerved from MacDonald, he turned around rather than to the
side. While MacDonald is condescending, Tolkien falls on the opposite
end—he neither explains nor instructs; and although his descriptions of
the Faerian world remain discernible, the intentions or motives of its
inhabitants remain unclear.
Tolkien’s Faery is most interesting for what it does not say. We meet
the elven mariners in medias res. They appear to be returning from battle
and have evidently won (Smith 26), but whom they defeated or where they
are headed cannot be determined. Next, we behold the King’s Tree in all
its glory, but know nothing about its purpose (28). It exists and its beauty
requires no explanation. Finally, Smith is responsible for awakening the
Wind, but what offence he has committed cannot be discerned—if he
has, in fact, done anything wrong (29-30). We are just as perplexed as
Smith as we experience a world we do not fully understand—a world
we are not meant to fully understand. After all, the text makes it plain
that there are things in Faery “which men know nothing” about (26).
And by saying nothing, not explaining these matters, Tolkien is at once
saying something—he is defending the world of Faery. In reaction to
MacDonald, who inundated The Golden Key with too much meaning and
elucidation, Tolkien creates an Otherworld full of uncertainty. If there is
one thing he is trying to get across, it is that Faery exists as a thing in its
own right and needs no other purpose than to delight and excite, which
it does for the reader and Smith alike.10
The imagery altogether overshadows the action of these scenes,
giving the text more of a poetic feel. Tolkien’s paratactic style, use of
alliteration, and rhythmic repetition of the word “and” further heightens
the poetic element. Such stylistic preferences align these passages with
Beowulf, which relies heavily on both alliterative meter and parataxis.
My point is not that Tolkien had Beowulf in mind or that he was even
consciously imitating the poem, but that Tolkien’s style contains both a
heroic seriousness and poetic eloquence that harkens back to Old English verse. Syntactic parallelisms add to the overall rhythm and flow of
these scenes (indentified below with brackets). And finally, Tolkien even133
Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influence
employs internal rhyme, such as “down to the ground” and “sun at noon”
(consonantal rhyme).
Elven Mariners Episode
Suddenly they lifted up their voices in a song of triumph,
[and his heart was shaken with fear], [and he fell upon his
face], [and they passed over him] [and went away into the
echoing hills.] (Smith 26)
King’s Tree Episode
He saw the King’s Tree springing up, tower upon tower,
into the sky, and its light was like the sun at noon; and it bore
at once leaves and flowers and fruits uncounted, and not one
was the same as any other that grew on the Tree. (Smith 28)
Wind and Birch Episode
At once the breeze rose to a wild Wind, [roaring like a great
beast], [and it swept him up] [and flung him on] the shore,
[and it drove him up] the slopes whirling and [falling like a
dead leaf]. (Smith 29)
Even when it seems that Tolkien has succumbed to triteness with such
similes as “like the sun at noon” and “like a dead leaf,” there is artistic
intention in his selection. If understood within the context, the similes
are not just appropriate but powerful. Leading up to the sun simile is a
description of the tree towering up into the sky; thus, it only makes sense
that the tree should be compared to the sun. The sun simile does not
detract from our visual image but adds to it. The tree is so overwhelming
in both size and radiance that it appears, if only for a moment, that it is
not merely like the sun but it is the sun. I think this is the image the passage is trying to evoke.
The leaf simile functions similarly. The wind is so strong that Smith
is not like a leaf as much as he is a leaf. This picture invokes reverse
personification, where the human takes on characteristics of an inanimate object. Therefore, it is fitting that we find Smith clinging to the stem
of a birch; he metaphorically becomes a leaf. What is more, the parallel
simile used to describe the wind as “a great beast” is not just syntactically
analogous; it is important to the scene; the wind is personified in the
same instance that Smith undergoes reverse personification.
In addition to these visions of Faery that give the story more of an
adult feel, Tolkien incorporated thematic elements that were geared towards adults. Just as MacDonald sought to establish a connection between children and his characters, Tolkien did likewise with adults by134
Josh Long
imbuing his text with a profound sense of bereavement—that inexplicable and inescapable feeling of loss that comes with old age.
Tolkien frequently made reference to this element of Smith. In writing to Roger Lancelyn Green, he referred to the story as “an old man’s
book, already weighted with the presage of ‘bereavement’” (Letters 389).11
The story begins and ends with bereavement. After twenty-four years of
service as Master Cook, Rider retires unexpectedly (Smith 9). Nevertheless, Rider is not the one left bereaved; he is almost too willing to give up
his position in order to return to Faery.12 The townspeople are the ones
most affected by his sudden disappearance, which is, in a sense, a death
because he is never heard from or seen of again. The main difference,
however, is that the townspeople carp rather than mourn their loss (Smith
9).
In addition, we soon discover that this is not the whole story and that
the history of Wootton Major goes all the way back to the birth of Rider.
In Tolkien’s essay on Smith, he devotes a large portion of it to recounting
the events of Rider’s life, and from it, we learn that Rider was one well
acquainted with loss. Tolkien writes, “[Rider’s] sadness and ‘air of having
his mind elsewhere’ [while he was Master Cook] was due no doubt not
only to his bereavement but also to this deprivation” (Smith 96). Rider’s
bereavement is a result of the untimely death of his wife Rose, who died
while giving birth to their daughter Ella, Smith’s mother. To make matters worse, Rider’s position as Master Cook prevents him from visiting
Faery, which is what Tolkien means by “this deprivation.” Though none
of these events take place in the published text, they assist in giving us a
fuller understanding of the bereavement that surrounds the narrative.
Though the loss that begins the story (and back-story) is rich and
complex, the bereavement that Smith endures at the end of the tale is
most profound. After meeting the Faery Queen and experiencing some
type of transcendence, Smith comes to the realization “that his way now
led back to bereavement” (Smith 39). The next paragraph begins, “That
meeting-place was now far behind him, and here he was, walking among
the fallen leaves, pondering all that he had seen and learned” (39). This
moment of solitude, before he meets up with the Faery King and relinquishes his star, is remarkable for its subtlety—it says much without
saying a lot. The outward setting becomes indicative of Smith’s inward
struggle; the barrenness of his surroundings parallels his own internal
landscape. Though he has not given up his star yet, he reflects on his past
experiences and realizes that he does not have much time remaining. His
encounter with the Faery Queen might very well be his final venture into
Faery.
Smith reluctantly gives up the star. After he returns home, the full extent of his bereavement sets in: “His son lit candles, and for a while they135
Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influence
sat by the fire without speaking; for a great weariness and bereavement
was on the smith” (Smith 49). In “Suggestions for the ending of the story,”
Tolkien explains Smith’s loss, which is to some extent his own, when he
writes, “A time comes for writers and artists, when invention and ‘vision’
cease and they can only reflect on what they have seen and learned”
(Smith 81). This quality of bereavement reemphasizes the adult nature
of Smith. As a corrective swerve to MacDonald, Tolkien made his story
adult-like not only tonally and stylistically, but also thematically.
Correcting the Allegory
The question of allegory has been an important issue in Smith criticism. In fact, two of the top Tolkien scholars take almost opposite positions on this matter—Tom Shippey finds the text to be rich with allegorical meaning, while Verlyn Flieger argues that the work is better read as
a fairy tale and valued as a thing in its own right (Shippey and Flieger
186–200). Part of the problem lies in Tolkien’s own comments on the
story. In his Smith essay, he notes that it “is not an ‘allegory’, though it
is capable of allegorical interpretations at certain points” (Smith 84). He
explains this in greater detail in a letter sent to Kilby: “[Smith is] not an
allegory (however applicable to this or that) in intention: certainly not in
the ‘Fay’ parts, and only fleetingly in the Human, where evidently The
Cook and the Great Hall etc. represent The Parson and Church and
their decay” (quoted in Scull and Hammond, Reader’s Guide 40).13 At face
value, Tolkien’s explanations seem incongruous, but his understanding
of the “allegory” in Smith is reconcilable.
It is important to begin by defining Tolkien’s terms. In his Smith essay,
he makes a distinction between allegory and allegorical interpretations.
What do these terms mean and how do they differ? Tolkien’s clearest
definition of allegory can be found in his comments on Pearl in the Introduction to his translation of the poem. He writes, “To be an ‘allegory’ a
poem must, and with fair consistency, describe in other terms some event
or process; its entire narrative and all its significant details should cohere
and work together to this end” (18). Ultimately, Smith is not an allegory
because the entire narrative does not work together to produce a fair and
complete secondary meaning. For instance, the Faery King and Queen
are not symbols of anything else, just as the elven mariners are elves and
the King’s Tree is a tree. The sustained one-to-one correspondences are
simply not there.
On the other hand, Smith “is capable of allegorical interpretations
at certain points.” But what does Tolkien mean by this? He explains the
term in a letter to Milton Waldman by distinguishing it from allegory:
“[T]he more ‘life’ a story has the more readily will it be susceptible of
allegorical interpretations: while the better a deliberate allegory is made136
Josh Long
the more nearly will it be acceptable just as a story” (Letters 145).
Although allegory and allegorical interpretations appear similar,
Tolkien makes it clear that they start out from opposite ends. Allegory
is a deliberate attempt on the part of the author to dominate the story
and reader’s mind; the secondary meaning is infused within the narrative framework. Allegorical interpretations, in contrast, arise as a reader
comes into contact with a text. A story is imbued with so much life that
it begins to exhibit allegorical qualities, and the reader soon discovers a
number of symbolic elements.
Tolkien makes a distinction between not only allegory and allegorical
interpretations, but also the Faery and Human parts of Smith. He was
concerned that the Faery would be interpreted allegorically and the literary belief would be lost or stifled. In his essay on Sir Gawain, he speaks of
“los[ing] Faerie only to gain a formalized allegory” (MC 79). I think this
is what he feared with Smith—that readers would merely hunt for secondary meaning rather than endeavor to appreciate the story as a story. It
seems to me that if you are going to trust what Tolkien says about his
work, you cannot feasibly interpret the Faery allegorically.
Taken as a whole, Smith functions as a corrective swerve because The
Golden Key is an allegory and Smith is not. Furthermore, while Tolkien insisted that his story’s Faery remain free of allegorical interpretations, The
Golden Key’s Fairyland exists primarily to sustain its secondary meaning.
The allegory in The Golden Key is plain; it is the story of Mossy and
Tangle’s journey to heaven. Mossy is an everyman just as John Bunyan’s Christian is one; the same is true of Tangle. Even the names of
the two children hint at the depravity of humanity—that we are grimy
and mixed-up. The golden key may be taken to be salvation; after all, it
is what allows Mossy and Tangle to enter heaven. MacDonald’s fairies
appear to represent angels, especially the aëranthes, who act as guardian angels for the two children—protecting, directing and guiding them
along their journey (13-14, 27, 45).
Grandmother is a Christ-figure; she welcomes both children openly
and without reserve (14, 31). She emanates warmth and humility, and is
responsible for washing both Mossy and Tangle clean. She teaches and
instructs the children on various matters. In fact, at one point, her speech
strongly recalls Christ’s own words in the gospel of Matthew.
Grandmother: “You must look for the keyhole. That is your
work. I cannot help you. I can only tell you that if you look
for it you will find it” (31).
Matthew 7:7: “Seek and you will find; knock and the door
will be opened to you.”137
Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influence
Both passages not only emphasize seeking and finding but also contain
door imagery.
Despite these allegorical parallels, the clearest indication that The
Golden Key is an allegory comes in the Platonic vision the children encounter when they enter the Valley of Shadows. MacDonald transforms
Plato’s Allegory of the Cave into a profoundly Christian model. Heaven
becomes the ultimate reality, while this world and its shadows are a mere
glimpse of eternity. It is only after seeing the world for what it truly is that
the children experience a moment of epiphany. “After sitting for a while,
each, looking up, saw the other in tears: they were each longing after the
country whence the shadows fell” (41). For the rest of the story, the two
children seek to find this place.
Shortly after this, Mossy and Tangle are separated—which suggests
that death has cut them off from one another (42). We follow Tangle for
most of the remaining portion of the story as she journeys through a
purgatorial realm, encountering the Old Man of the Sea, the Old Man
of the Earth, and the Old Man of the Fire (45-65). Each Old Man represents a process of cleansing, purging, and refining that Tangle must
undergo to attain eternal life. Mossy only has to face the Old Man of
the Earth before he is directed to heaven. The story ends with Mossy
and Tangle reuniting, opening a door with the golden key, ascending a
staircase, and then entering into a rainbow, which is obviously heaven
(73-78).
Unlike The Golden Key, Smith’s allegorical content is positioned in the
Human part of the story. Though Tolkien’s own allegorical interpretation of the Master Cook and the Great Hall can be found in the text,
this reading is ineffective because it is too subtle—besides the author,
no one else was able to detect its presence. The most obvious allegorical
interpretation of Smith relates to the cake, fairy queen, and Nokes, which
seems to me to be a commentary on MacDonald and his art.
Before I develop this allegorical interpretation, I would like to make
several prefatory comments. Firstly, as Tom Shippey has pointed out in
regarded to his own allegorical reading of Smith: “[A]t the more advanced
stages of reading an allegory, it is not essential to come up with the one
single correct solution. . . . A suggestive or a provocative one will do”
(Author 298).
Secondly, it cannot be overstated just how much Tolkien came to dislike MacDonald towards the end of his life. His own statements confirm
this, but even more compelling is the first-hand account we get from Kilby: “[Tolkien] said he had found MacDonald terrible and his broadside
criticism of him implied that nothing he had written was worthwhile”
(Tolkien 36-7).
Finally, it should be noted that I am not the first commentator to view138
Josh Long
Nokes as a MacDonald-figure. Kilby suggests that Nokes “may represent
MacDonald” because he could make a cake that was appealing on the
outside, but had no idea of what went into making a Great one (Tolkien
37). Margaret Sammons also finds Nokes to be a MacDonald-figure. She
observes, “Tolkien is perhaps saying that MacDonald believes Faerie is
merely something sweet and funny and has little notion of what to put
inside a great Tale” (4).
It is no mere accident that Nokes is the antagonist of the story, nor is
it by chance that his name means fool. Also, he is the only character who
uses the modern form fairy—the very spelling MacDonald uses in The
Golden Key. Though this spelling is not unique to MacDonald, there are
other passages in Smith that clearly tie Nokes to him. Nokes’ description
of the fairy queen as “a tricky little creature” (Smith 15) strongly recalls
MacDonald’s portrayal of the “little creatures” who “play [the maids]
all manner of uncomfortable tricks” (Golden 10-11). In addition, after the
children finish eating their cake, Nokes exclaims, “Bless me! Then [the
star] can’t have been made of silver after all; it must have melted. Or
perhaps Mr. Prentice was right and it was really magical, and it’s just
vanished and gone back to Fairyland. Not a nice trick to play, I don’t
think” (Smith 18). Nokes is the only character to use the term “Fairyland,”
which is the term MacDonald uses throughout The Golden Key. Moreover,
in this passage, Nokes reemphasizes the tricky nature of fairies. Even the
fact that Nokes insists that fairy is funny is an idea put forth in The Golden
Key—MacDonald’s fairies accidentally make Tangle laugh (Golden 12).
Clearly, Nokes is a somewhat satirical portrait of MacDonald.
Just as Nokes is analogous to MacDonald, his fairy queen is modeled after MacDonald’s fairies—the aëranth. MacDonald’s aëranth is described as “a lovely little creature in human shape, with large white wings”
(Golden 26), and “a beautiful little creature with wings” (45). Nokes’ fairy
queen is depicted quite similarly as “a little doll . . . dressed all in white,
with a little wand in her hand” (Smith 11) and “a tiny white figure on one
foot like a snow-maiden dancing” (14). Both are diminutive, white, and
pretty. Moreover, each contains a traditional characteristic of the little
fairy—wings and a wand respectively. Nokes’ fairy is plainly an exaggerated caricature of MacDonald’s aëranth.
Tolkien was so opposed to the idea of fairy littleness that he satirized
it by having Nokes fill his cake with an excessive number of small artifacts. It is not just the queen and her wand that are small, but little trinkets
and coins are mixed into the batter, and little trees and a small mountain
are placed on the outside. Nokes includes all of these because he assumes that “it amuses the children” (Smith 13). Tolkien is commenting
on MacDonald’s art; he felt MacDonald had geared his “Great Cake” to
what he perceived was the reach of children’s tastes, and by doing so, he139
Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influence
had produced a work that was overly sweet, petty, and inadequate. It is no
wonder that only two of the twenty-four children at the feast are vocally
excited about the cake, and after it is passed out, there is “nothing left
over: no coming again” (18). Moreover, Nokes’ cake does not go down
in history. “Indeed it is said that [Nokes] just made his century: the only
memorable thing he ever achieved” (Smith 59, emphasis added).
Although most commentators have indentified Smith as a Tolkienfigure, few have discussed Smith as a child. This portion of the story fits,
if with more work, into my reading. Tolkien “grew up on” MacDonald,
as Lewis puts it (Collected Letters 2: 96). In other words, MacDonald was
one of Tolkien’s first encounters with Fairy. My allegorical interpretation suddenly takes on autobiographical implications. Although Nokes’
cake had mostly failed, it did contain a “glimpse” of Faery (i.e. the star)
as the Queen alludes to later. It was this inspiration that eventually led
Tolkien to true Faery. When Tolkien writes in his abandoned Introduction to The Golden Key, “Some one may meet them [the marvels of Fairy]
for the first time in his silly tale, and catch a glimpse of Fairy and go on
to better things” (Smith 74), he is likely recounting his own history with
MacDonald.
Tessera: Redeeming the Word through Antithetical Completion
Tolkien’s clinamen affected the larger elements of Smith—the story’s
tone and themes, and the positioning and use of allegory, but Tolkien’s
tessera shaped the smaller elements of the story—the words. Bloom describes this revisionary ratio thus: “A poet antithetically ‘completes’ his
precursor, by so reading the parent-poem as to retain its terms but to
mean them in another sense, as though the precursor had failed to go
far enough” (14). This ratio, even more so than clinamen, works well with
Tolkien because of the nature of his profession. As a philologist and
wordsmith, he was naturally concerned with words and their meanings.
If there is one word that Tolkien was trying to redeem from MacDonald,
it was certainly the word fairy.14
In Smith, the first indication that Tolkien was attempting a tessera is
seen in the fact that he includes a different spelling of the word. Flieger
observes,
He felt that the word fairy as conventionally used in modern
English had been debased, and divorced from its original
complex and powerful meaning. He chose the older spellings
[Faërie, Fayery, and Faery] to dissociate the word from its
modern connotations of prettiness, delicacy, and diminutive
stature, and return it to the older, considerably darker meanings it once had had. (Smith 143)140
Josh Long
In Smith, Tolkien settled on Faery; all of the characters use this form except Nokes (Smith 143). This was by no means the first time that Tolkien
employed this spelling. As early as 1915, he used it in his poem “The
Shores of Faëry” (Lost Tales II 271-2). Nevertheless, this does not negate
or lessen his tessera. He included this spelling in Smith primarily to juxtapose it to MacDonald’s fairy.
Although Tolkien retained MacDonald’s word, his understanding of
the term was antithetically different. This is seen most clearly in both authors’ depictions of fairies. In The Golden Key, MacDonald’s fairies do not
play a major role. Nonetheless, they are described and do serve a purpose
in inadvertently prompting Tangle towards Fairyland. In addition, they
also serve as guides once the children are there. MacDonald introduces
them in this fashion: “Now it is well known that the little creatures commonly
called fairies, though there are many different kinds of fairies in Fairyland,
have an exceeding dislike to untidiness. Indeed, they are quite spiteful to
slovenly people” (10-11, emphasis added). In contrast, Tolkien describes
the Faery Queen: “She wore no crown and had no throne. She stood
there in her majesty and her glory, and all about her was a great host
shimmering and glittering like the stars above; but she was taller than the
points of their great spears, and upon her head there burned a white flame”
(Smith 36-7, emphasis added). The most apparent difference between the
two is physical size; however, I think Tolkien’s understanding of Faeries is distinct in other ways as well. The Faery Queen’s splendor causes
humanity (Smith) to tremble in her presence—one might say she is just
short of divinity. MacDonald’s fairies pale in comparison—they are mischievous at best. Leaving the maids with bruises, they are just short of
hilarity. In fact, his fairies are so incompetent that the first time they try to
make Tangle run away from home they actually cause her to laugh (12).
In addition, it is also worth noting how both authors approach their
fairies. Typical of MacDonald, he utilizes them as an instrument for
instruction. Clearly appealing to his Victorian sensibilities, he stresses the
need for cleanliness and tidiness. In a way, his juvenile audience is being
frightened into keeping their rooms and/or appearances clean because
the assumption is if they do not, bad fairies will come and harass them.
In keeping with the tone of the rest of the story, this passage reemphasizes MacDonald’s didactic proclivity, which often carries to the point of
condescension. In this way, his fairies are not just inferior to Tolkien’s;
they are insignificant in and of themselves; they exist as mere children’s
props and contain none of the terror or beauty that Tolkien believed was
a necessary part of their tradition.
Tolkien, on the other hand, uses the Faery Queen to exemplify and
re-establish the concept of terrifying beauty—something he believed had
been lost in modern times. In “On Fairy-stories,” he writes, “The fear of141
Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influence
the beautiful fay that ran through the elder ages almost eludes our grasp”
(MC 151). Furthermore, the seriousness of the situation is apparent; unlike MacDonald, Tolkien values his Faeries and suggests that they should
be feared, not laughed at. In fact, the same awe-inspiring trepidation that
the Faery Queen instills in Smith can also be seen in the elven mariners,
when Smith first encounters them (Smith 26-27), and Alf, when he reveals
himself as the King of Faery (58). Moreover, both the elven mariners
and Alf are described as tall (26, 39, 58). Tolkien was determined to
antithetically complete MacDonald’s word by making his Faeries tall and
terrifying.
The final difference between the two fairies is that Tolkien’s Faeries
radically affect the primary world—they improve it. MacDonald’s fairies
may be concerned with keeping the primary world tidy, but they are not
very good at it, and ultimately, their contribution is of no real significance.
In contrast, Alf transforms the town of Wootton Major. Towards the end
of the story, we learn that “the Hall had been re-glazed and re-painted”
(Smith 46). This renovation—the decoration of the Great Hall—is surely
something Alf is responsible for. Just as Smith’s life was enriched by the
fay-star, the town of Wootton Major is forever changed by Alf ’s presence.
Though his Faerian adornment appears to some as new, it is actually a
return to a forgotten but important tradition—which allows more than
just the smith to come into contact with Faery.
In juxtaposition to Nokes’s cake at the beginning of the tale, which
leaves only a couple of children outwardly excited, the story closes with
Alf ’s Great Cake. It is important and appropriate that this cake enthuses
all the children. “The children all laughed and clapped” (Smith 61). Tolkien is again commenting on the superiority of his own art and the inferiority of MacDonald’s, but the real point is that the children have now
caught a glimpse of Faery. After Alf departs, the narrator notes that the
town “kept the Hall gilded and painted in memory of Alf ” (62). Alf has
left a lasting impression on the children and adults alike—this is something Nokes could never do.
In the end, Tolkien’s tessera was not so much a turning away as a
returning to; like Alf ’s renovation of the Hall, Tolkien was looking to
the past to restore the present. He expressed this most poignantly in an
interview he gave to William Cater on the 2 August 1966. “By writing
about elves as tall as men I am restoring tradition, trying to rescue the
word from the nursery” (10).15 For him, the world of Faery and the word
Faery were so intricately and inextricably connected that in order to do
justice to the former, one first had to have a proper understanding of
the latter. For Tolkien, MacDonald had failed in his depiction of fairies
because he did not have an accurate conception of them—he was misusing them for children and misrepresenting them as small—in size as well
as significance.142
Josh Long
The Anxiety of MacDonald
Tolkien’s relationship with MacDonald is complex because although
he read him as a child and praised his stories as an adult, he grew to despise him later in life. Even so, he recognized that MacDonald did affect
his imagination. In a rejected beginning to “On Fairy-stories,” he asserts,
“For me at any rate fairy-stories are especially associated with Scotland
. . . by reason of the names of Andrew Lang and George MacDonald.
To them in different ways I owe the books which most affected the background of my imagination since childhood” (quoted in Scull and Hammond, Reader’s Guide 567, ellipsis in original).16
Undoubtedly, MacDonald exerted some influence on him as a writer. In a 1954 letter to Naomi Mitchison, he explained, “[Orcs] are not
based on direct experience of mine; but owe, I suppose, a good deal to
the goblin tradition . . . especially as it appears in George MacDonald”
(Letters 178).17 In 1958, he acknowledged in a letter to Mrs. L.M. Cutts
that his Ents contained “perhaps some remote influence from George
MacDonald’s [sic] Phantastes (a work I do not actually much like)” (Tolkien
On Fairy-stories 207). Although he recognized that he owed some minor
influence to MacDonald, there is a hesitancy about his admission, as if
he was not quite willing to acknowledge his debt. Carpenter tells another
story that confirms much the same,
I did once suggest to [Tolkien], one of the few conversations
I remember having with him myself, that The Princess and the
Goblin [by MacDonald] has certain resemblances to The Hobbit. Beneath the mountain in both books there are goblins
mining, and he was, I think, momentarily disconcerted by
this suggestion and did admit that there might have been
some very slight influence there, a memory from childhood,
but no conscious influences. (Carpenter, Sayer and Kilby
17)
What this reveals is that although Tolkien was willing to admit to trivial
influences, deep down inside he was anxious about MacDonald. Bloom
writes,
The poet in every reader does not experience the same disjunction from what he reads that the critic in every reader necessarily feels. What gives pleasure to the critic in a reader may
give anxiety to the poet in him, an anxiety we have learned,
as readers, to neglect, to our own loss and peril. This anxiety,
this mode of melancholy, is the anxiety of influence. (25)
That Tolkien was plagued by this type of anxiety is quite evident. George143
Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influence
Sayer recalls, “On the whole, Tolkien was, even then, not inclined to admit to the influence on him of any other writers at all” (Carpenter, Sayer
and Kilby 15). Carpenter more specifically observes, “Tolkien, like Lewis,
knew MacDonald’s children’s stories during his own childhood. He later
repudiated any influence of MacDonald’s along with repudiating the influence of practically everybody else” (Carpenter, Sayer and Kilby 17).
Kilby asserts, “It looked to me as if he had used MacDonald and very
much didn’t want to confess it—it was a strange thing. It wouldn’t have
made any difference if he did” (Carpenter, Sayer and Kilby 17).
Yet it would have made all the difference according to Bloom. He
suggests, “Poets as poets cannot accept substitutions, and fight to the
end to have their initial chance alone” (8).18 Tolkien’s insistent denial
of influence was a defense mechanism, a way of maintaining his own
poetic vision; his very existence as a writer depended on it. In fact, for
him to admit to the influence of MacDonald essentially meant he was a
lesser writer. “Where generosity is involved,” proposes Bloom, “the poets
influenced are minor or weaker; the more generosity, and the more mutual it is, the poorer the poets involved” (30). This is a relatively modern
view of literature, which has not always been prevalent. Kilby provides
a good account of our contemporary understanding: “Today we feature
the ‘star’ and tend to become more enamored of a name than of an
accomplishment. We also worship utter originality to the point of eccentricity and regard literary indebtedness as shameful. These things were
not always so” (“Tolkien as Scholar” 9). In fact, the meaning of “original” as new or without imitation did not emerge until midway through
the neoclassical period. The OED records that Joseph Warton was the
first to use this word in this sense. In his 1757 work Essay on the Genius and
Writings of Pope, he writes of the “new and original images” of Thomson
(42), praises Dante’s “sublime and original poem” (190), and acknowledges that while Pope was “a most excellent improver,” he was “no great
original inventor” (298).
For the medieval writer, the word carried an entirely different meaning—it was much more connected with its root word “origin.” When
Gower alludes to “the lawe original” (Confessio Amantis), he is talking
about the first and most perfect law. In The Legend of Good Women, when
Chaucer writes, “Ye gete no more of me, but ye wil rede / Thoriginal
[the original], that telleth al the cas,” he is referring back to an earlier
work, most likely Ovid’s Heroides (Skeat 171). “Original” had nothing to
do with novelty, and in terms of literature, it actually consisted of using
a precursor’s material. In her book Absent Narratives, Manuscript Textuality, and Literary Structure in Late Medieval England, Elizabeth Scala observes,
“A medieval definition of ‘originality,’ then, would call attention to the
origins from which a story comes. Originality in the Middle Ages points144
Josh Long
toward tradition rather than innovation, even as its literary productions
begin approaching such novelty” (3).19
Although Tolkien was a medievalist, he did not subscribe to the medieval understanding of “original.” Like most of his contemporaries, he
fought to preserve his own creative enterprise—a vision that was uniquely and wholly his own. According to Bloom, in a poet’s attempt to pursue
his own artistic ends, he inevitably becomes engrossed in his own creation. Bloom posits, “Poets, by the time they have grown strong, do not
read the poetry of X, for really strong poets can read only themselves.
For them, to be judicious is to be weak, and to compare, exactly and
fairly, is to be not elect” (19). Such a self-focused approach is indicative of
the strong poet. In his pursuit after greatness, he becomes solely devoted
to and completely consumed by his own work.
Tolkien faced such a poetic dilemma. In writing to C. S. Lewis in
January 1948, he admitted, “I have something that I deeply desire to
make, and which it is the (largely frustrated) bent of my nature to make.
Without any vanity or exaggerated notion of the universal importance
of this, it remains a fact that other things are to me less important” (Letters
126-7). Tolkien is, of course, referring to The Lord of the Rings, or more
generally, his mythology as whole. He began The Lord of the Rings in December 1937, The Silmarillion about two decades earlier; at this point
in his life, both remained unpublished and unfinished. Surely, Tolkien
had grown preoccupied with his own poetic aim. Other things were to
him far less important than his own making. About two decades later, he
would reaffirm himself as a strong poet in an interview.
I think I was born with what you might call an inventive
mind, and the books that have remained in my mind remain
as those things which I acquired and don’t really seem much
like the book itself. For instance, I now find that I can’t stand
George McDonald’s books at any price at all. I find that now
I can’t take him. The same with most books that I’ve read. (quoted
in Resnik 40, emphasis added)
Tolkien reiterated this in yet another interview: “In any case, I don’t read
much now, not even fairy-stories. And then I’m always looking for something I can’t find. Something like what I wrote myself ” (quoted in Plimmer 35). In his mind, all other books paled in comparison to his own. He
did “not read the poetry of X” because he could “read only” himself
(Bloom 19).
Much of Tolkien’s denial of influence stems from his anxiety over it.
Like many writers before him, he believed that originality was a natural
byproduct of literary greatness. He offers up this very notion in Smith:
“It was expected that the Great Cake should have something novel and145
Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influence
surprising about it and not be a mere repetition of the one before” (11).
This is as much a comment about his own art as it is MacDonald’s. Tolkien had indubitably been influenced by MacDonald, but he could not
accept this. He had poured himself into his fiction—it was rightfully his,
and he did not want to have his own poetic vision confused with that of
MacDonald’s. Bloom rhetorically asks, “For what strong maker desires
the realization that he has failed to create himself ?” (5). Tolkien definitely
felt this tension. His hostility toward MacDonald was as much a result of
anxiety as disgust; he feared that others would associate him with a writer
he now considered inferior.
In fact, some of the very criticisms Tolkien made about MacDonald
can be found in Tolkien’s own early work. The Hobbit, for example, contains the same kind of patronizing tone that Tolkien accused MacDonald
of using. He told Philip Norman on 9 August 1966,
‘The Hobbit’ was written in what I should now regard as bad
style, as if one were talking to children. There’s nothing my
children loathed more. They taught me a lesson. Anything
that in any way marked out ‘The Hobbit’ as for children instead of just for people, they disliked—instinctively. I did too,
now that I think about it. All this ‘I won’t tell you any more,
you think about it’ stuff. Oh no, they loathe it; it’s awful.
(100)
In addition, “Goblin Feet,” one of Tolkien’s earliest published poems, is
swarming with little fairy-creatures.20 In 1971, he denounced the piece
altogether when he insisted, “I wish the unhappy little thing, representing all that I came (so soon after) to fervently dislike, could be buried for
ever” (quoted in Lost Tales I 32). Clearly, Tolkien had derived his initial
ideas about fairies and fairy tales from MacDonald and his contemporaries. As he told W. H. Auden in a 1955 letter: “[The Hobbit] has some of
the sillinesses of manner caught unthinkingly from the kind of stuff I had
had served to me” (Letters 215). Another reason Tolkien was so disparaging towards MacDonald was because he had exhibited an influence on
Tolkien that had tarnished his own early writing.
It was through The Lord of the Rings that Tolkien first broke away from
his “Poetic Father” (Bloom 42), but Tolkien’s corrective movement and
turning were not fully actualized until Smith. As a reactionary piece, Smith
allowed Tolkien “to clear imaginative space” for himself (Bloom 5); it
provided him with a chance at “something novel” (Smith 11). MacDonald
had failed to live up to Tolkien’s staunch standards and pedantic expectations. There is an obvious air of superiority in Tolkien’s swerve and completion—it is that MacDonald was wrong and would have done better
had he been more like Tolkien. Bloom suggests, “The stronger the man,146
Josh Long
the larger his resentments, and the more brazen his clinamen” (43). Evidently, Tolkien must have contained a considerable amount of strength.
Epilogue: A Brief Defense of MacDonald
It must be remembered that Tolkien was “a man of limited sympathies” and that his “taste [was] not normal” (Letters 349, 34). We should
be slow to adopt his dislikes, especially those he acquired late in life when
his opinions on various matters changed substantially. Despite Tolkien’s
many severe criticisms of The Golden Key, it remains an extremely moving
story. Like Lewis’s Narnian Chronicles, The Golden Key’s greatest strength
lies in its ability to speak to children while at the same time, comment
on deeper spiritual truths. All the same, the story’s Fairy is fantastical
enough that it can be read and reread without ever taking any notice
of its allegorical content. It captures the imagination and raptures the
reader into an Otherworld full of beauty and mystery.
The most profound scene occurs when Mossy and Tangle enter the
Valley of Shadows. This passage is attractive in a number of ways. First,
the description of the barren landscape teeming with shadows is captivating; as a reader, you are drawn in, yet you hesitantly fear the strangeness.
Such vivid description recalls some of Smith’s own poignant adventures.
MacDonald is at his best when he simply describes rather than explains.
Second, the children’s sorrowful realization that they are longing for a
far off country speaks powerfully to the human condition because we all
have at one time or another longed for something beyond ourselves or
situation. Third, MacDonald places himself in a larger intellectual context by combining Plato’s metaphysics with Christian theology. In short,
the allegory satisfies the literary critics; the Platonism satisfies the philosophers; and the Christian theology satisfies the theologians.
NOTES
I AM GRATEFULTO THE EDITORIALSTAFF OF Tolkien Studies—Douglas A. Anderson, Michael D. C. Drout, and Verlyn Flieger—for reading over
my article numerous times and providing me with detailed criticism.
I would also like to thank the anonymous reader for his or her excellent feedback. Diana Pavlac Glyer and David Bratman, thanks for
giving my article a final read. And finally, I’d like to thank my wife for
her support, encouragement, and assistance.
1 Sammons notes, “As Tolkien explained in an unpublished letter to
Professor Clyde Kilby, the story evolved quite by accident” (4).
2 The thesis is entitled The Fairy Tales and Fantasies of George MacDonald
by Mary M. McEldowney (Scull and Hammond, Chronology 174).147
Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influence
3 See also Scull and Hammond (Chronology 625).
4 Glyer defines negative influence as “a situation where one work is
created in deliberate opposition to another” (37).
5 C. S. Lewis was known to his close friends and family as “Jack.”
6 It is true that in Tolkien’s original assessment of The Golden Key he did
not perceive that it was a children’s story. In a note to “On Fairy-stories,” he writes that it “is not for children though children do read it
with pleasure” (Tolkien On Fairy-stories 250).
7 See also Scull and Hammond (Reader’s Guide 570).
8 Although in this quote Tolkien mentions Phantastes rather than The
Golden Key, he plainly understood the latter to be an allegory as well.
In his notes to “On Fairy-stories,” he specifies that it was “constructed
with consc[ious] alleg[ory]” (quoted in Scull and Hammond Reader’s
Guide 570).
9 Tolkien once wrote, “The Lord of the Rings was a deliberate attempt to
write a large-scale adult fairy-story” (quoted in Manlove 158). This
quotation is taken from a letter dated 8 February 1967 to C. N. Manlove.
10 Many of the ideas presented in this section owe a great deal to Flieger’s discussion of Smith in her article “The Footsteps of Ælfwine”
(196).
11 See also Carpenter (244).
12 Though it can be inferred from the narrative that Rider returns to
Faery after he leaves Wootton Major, Tolkien makes it plain in his
essay that Rider “went back to Walton, where by the ‘entrance’ long
familiar to him, he could enter Faery, but live and end his days among
his wife’s kin” (Smith 99).
13 See also Smith (70, 99-100) and Scull and Hammond (Reader’s Guide
945).
14 Bloom asserts, “The tessera represents any later poet’s attempt to
persuade himself (and us) that the precursor’s Word would be worn
out if not redeemed as a newly fulfilled and enlarged Word of the
ephebe” (67).
15 John D. Rateliff notes, “The usage in The Book of Lost Tales establishes
‘fairy’ as a synonym for ‘elf ’” (59). I have found this to be the case
in “On Fairy-stories” as well, where Tolkien writes, “Fairy, as a noun148
Josh Long
more or less equivalent to elf, is a relatively modern word” (MC 112).
Moreover, the fact that he gives the Faery King the name Alf (Elf)
reaffirms this interpretation.
16 See also Scull and Hammond (Reader’s Guide 277).
17 See also Letters (185). For a more detailed discussion of MacDonald’s
influence on Tolkien’s Orcs, see Rateliff (140-141) and Green (69-
71).
18 Later, Bloom adds, “A poet’s stance, his Word, his imaginative identity, his whole being, must be unique to him, and remain unique, or he
will perish, as a poet” (71).
19 C. S. Lewis observes, “One is tempted to say that almost the typical
activity of the medieval author consists in touching up something
that was already there; as Chaucer touched up Boccaccio, as Malory
touched up French prose romances which themselves touched up
earlier romances in verse, as La3amon works over Wace, who works
over Geoffrey, who works over no one knows what. We are inclined
to wonder how men could be at once so original that they handled
no predecessor without pouring new life into him, and so unoriginal that they seldom did anything completely new” (Discarded 209). A
couple pages later, he concludes, “The originality which we regard as
a sign of wealth might have seemed to them a confession of poverty”
(211).
20 Scull and Hammond write, “Some of [Tolkien’s] earliest writings,
such as the poems Goblin Feet and The Princess Ní, portray similar diminutive beings, and it was his intention in The Book of Lost Tales
that in the future the Elves would actually fade and diminish and
become transparent, and so become the ‘fairies’ as commonly conceived” (Reader’s Guide 280). Rateliff references “Goblin Feet,” “The
Princess Ni,” and “Tinfang Warble” as early examples of poetry in
which Tolkien depicts little fairies. He claims, “Tolkien later came to
disavow the idea of elves as cute little fairies and moved his own elves
firmly in the direction of medieval elf-lore; the Rivendell episodes in
The Hobbit mark virtually its last appearance in the ‘main line’ of his
legendarium” (120).
WORKS CITED
Bloom, Harold. The Anxiety of Influence: A Theory of Poetry. London: Oxford University Press, 1975.149
Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influence
Carpenter, Humphrey. Tolkien: A Biography. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
2000.
———, George Sayer, and Clyde Kilby. “A Dialogue.” Minas Tirith Evening-Star, 9 no. 2 (January 1980): 14-18.
Cater, William. “Lord of the Hobbits.” Daily Express, 22 November 1966:
10.
Flieger, Verlyn. “The Footsteps of Ælfwine.” In Tolkien’s Legendarium: Essays on The History of Middle-earth, ed. Verlyn Flieger and Carl F.
Hostetter. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2000: 183-198.
Glyer, Diana Pavlac, and Kilby, Clyde S.. The Company They Keep: C. S.
Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien as Writers in Community. Kent, OH: Kent
State University Press, 2007.
Green, William H. The Hobbit: A Journey into Maturity. New York: Twayne
Publishers, 1995.
Hammond, Wayne G., and Christina Scull. The Lord of the Rings: A Reader’s Companion. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2005.
Kilby, Clyde. Tolkien and The Silmarillion. Wheaton, IL: Harold Shaw,
1976.
———. “Tolkien as a Scholar and Artist.” Tolkien Journal, 3 no. 1 (1967):
9-11.
Lewis, C. S. The Collected Letters of C. S. Lewis. Ed. Walter Hooper. 3 vols.
London: HarperCollins, 2000-07.
———. The Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval and Renaissance Literature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1964.
MacDonald, George. The Golden Key. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1967.
Manlove, C. N. Modern Fantasy: Five Studies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975.
Norman, Philip. “The Prevalence of Hobbits.” New York Times Magazine,
15 January 1967: 30-31, 97, 100, 102. http://www.nytimes.
com/1967/01/15/books/tolkien-interview.html [Accessed 12
February 2005].
Plimmer, Charlotte, and Denis. “The Man Who Understands Hobbits.”
The Daily Telegraph Magazine, 22 March 1968: 31-32, 35.150
Josh Long
Rateliff, John D. The History of The Hobbit Part One: Mr. Baggins. London:
HarperCollins, 2007.
Ringel, Faye. “Women Fantasists: In the Shadow of the Ring.” In J.R.R.
Tolkien and His Literary Resonances: Views of Middle-earth, ed. George
Clark and Daniel Timmons. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press,
2000: 159-171.
Resnik, Henry. “An Interview with Tolkien.” Niekas 18 (Spring 1967): 37-
47.
Sammons, Margaret. “Tolkien on Fantasy in Smith of Wootton Major.”
Mythlore 12 no. 1 (whole no. 43; Autumn 1985): 3-7, 37.
Scala, Elizabeth. Absent Narratives, Manuscript Textuality, and Literary Structure
in Late Medieval England. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.
Scull, Christina, and Wayne G. Hammond. The J.R.R. Companion & Guide:
Chronology. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006.
———. The J.R.R. Companion & Guide: Reader’s Guide. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 2006.
Shippey, Tom. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2002.
———, and Verlyn Flieger. “Allegory versus Bounce: Tolkien’s Smith of
Wootton Major.” Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts 12 no. 2 (whole
no. 46; 2001): 186-200.
Skeat, Walter W., ed. Chaucer: The Legend of Good Women. By Geoffrey
Chaucer. Whitefish, MT: Kessinger Publishing, 2006.151
Tolkien’s texts copyright ©2009 The Tolkien Trust
Copyright © West Virginia University Press
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in
Middle-earth
VERLYN FLIEGER
It is nothing less than an attempt to justify God’s creation of
an imperfect world filled with suffering, loss, and grief.
—John Garth, Tolkien and the Great War
During December and January of 1916-17, the very middle and depths of World War I, the young J.R.R. Tolkien, newly returned
to England from the carnage of the Somme, began to write his great legendarium, the Silmarillion. This was intended to supply what Tolkien felt
was missing from his country’s literary pre-history, an indigenous English (not British) mythology on the order of the Finnish Kalevala and the
Icelandic Eddas. He envisioned this ambitious project as “a more or less
connected body of legend” ranging from the “large and cosmogonic” to
the level of “romantic fairy-story” (Letters 144). In the process of creating
his mythology, however, Tolkien did more than color in a blank space;
he invented a cosmology whose operation depends on a paradox, a challenging teleological contradiction.
The contradiction resides in the simultaneous presence in his invented world of two opposing principles, fate and free will, imagined as operating side by side, sometimes in conflict, sometimes interdependent. The
teleology provides that this paradox, established at the beginning in his
myth’s Creation narrative, will accomplish its end in both senses of that
word—both as purpose and as completion—as described in the epigraph
at the head of this article. The challenge arises when fate and free will
intersect, for this collision of mutually contradictive forces engenders a
cognitive disjunction that works against readers’ acceptance of its operation in the Secondary World.
The trouble lies not with free will, but with fate. Readers who assume (and most do) that characters in Tolkien’s invented world are free
to choose, find the opposing notion that they are predestined hard to accept. And the idea that both principles are concurrently at work (and apparently at odds) is a concept even harder to encompass. It is, nevertheless, a concept integral to a mythology whose overarching scheme is that
fate, conceived as a kind of divinely inspired and celestially orchestrated
music, governs the created world—with one exception. Of all Middleearth’s sentient species, the race of Men (including Hobbits) is the only152
Verlyn Flieger
group given the “virtue” to “shape their lives” beyond the scope of this
music In contradistinction, the otherwise generally similar race of Elves,
(both races being the Children of [the godhead] Ilúvatar) is, together
with the rest of Creation, ruled by fate.
A Green Sun
In its apparent impossibility of reconciliation, this fate/free will dichotomy is what in his essay “On Fairy-stories” Tolkien termed a “green
sun.” That is to say, it is an element, a feature, or aspect intentionally
contrary to the Primary world but essential and formative in the Secondary one. The concept goes to the heart of what he called “sub-creation,”
the making of a believable imaginary world. “Anyone,” he wrote, “can
say the green sun. Many can then imagine or picture it.” But neither the
phrase nor the striking image it evokes is by itself enough to make his
point, and Tolkien went on to explain what more would be necessary.
“To make a Secondary World in which the green sun will be credible,” he
wrote, “commanding Secondary Belief, will probably require labour and
thought, and will certainly demand a special skill, a kind of elvish craft”
(MC 140).
Labour and thought he most certainly gave it, as well as applying his
own elvish craft, which was considerable. Yet for many even of his most
devoted admirers, this departure of Tolkien’s Secondary World from the
laws or principles of the Primary World is not just a green sun, it is one
green sun too many, putting a breaking strain on Secondary Belief already stretched by accepting Elves, Hobbits, talking eagles and walking
trees. Perhaps for that reason it has been largely ignored in the search for
the keys to his cosmology. The assumption that either of the principles
in question by definition obviates the other has tended to conceal this
particular green sun, so that most readers seem disposed to look past it
rather than at it. Like Poe’s purloined letter, it is hidden in plain sight,
openly displayed but easily overlooked.
Readerly inattention notwithstanding, this green sun is not only a
necessary and formative feature of Tolkien’s Secondary World, it is the
very mechanism by which it operates. In the Primary World the relative
governance of fate or free will has been for millennia a topic for debate
among philosophers and theologians, who argue the extent to which
either factor may be in force. Tolkien had the daring and freedom of
imagination to envision a world wherein both are co-existent, simultaneously in operation and co-operation.1 So far as I am aware, this vision is
unique in modern fantasy.2
Its uniqueness, however, is just what fosters its invisibility and permits
scholars rather to view his cosmology through the lens of this or that
more familiar and thus more readily perceived real-world philosophical153
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
system.3 The impulse to associate the unconventional with the familiar
is not unlike that of early genre-critics who wanted The Lord of the Rings
to be a fairy tale or an epic or a romance, all the while conceding that
it was a novel, though it certainly didn’t read like one. Of course it is sui
generis, and of course it contains elements from many genres, just as it also
invites comparison with real-world philosophical systems. Comparison
and similarity, however, are not necessarily the same thing. Most of these
real-world systems specify fate or free will, and even when, like Boethius,
they include some version of both, they do not, as does Tolkien, assign
each to a different group existing in the same world at the same time.
A good question to start with, then, is why? Why would Tolkien deliberately contrive a system so at odds with itself, so cross-grained and
contrary that nobody wants to see it, much less accept it? I suggest that
he had three reasons, one strategic, the second personal, the last sub-creative. The strategic reason was to forestall or at least defuse the inevitable
comparisons with real-world systems. The personal reason related to a
major and then quite recent external event in Tolkien’s life, the loss in
1916 of two of his closest friends, killed in World War I. The sub-creative
reason was to give to an ordered universe a plausible mechanism for
change. I will tackle the strategic reason first, then the personal one, and
save the sub-creative reason for more extended discussion
Elements in Solution
As to the strategy, I suggest that it was designed to assure that his
mythology be taken on its own terms for the imaginative creation that it
was, without being boxed in by any mythological, philosophical or literary look-alike. In a literary culture where comparison is a standard practice and source-hunting a favorite pastime, such independence is hard to
maintain, but Tolkien did his best. While scholars such as Tom Shippey
and Marjorie Burns have offered good and clear evidence in Tolkien’s
work of influences from Old and Middle English and Old Icelandic, and
Tolkien himself acknowledged the influence of the Finnish Kalevala on
both his Quenya language and his epic story of Túrin Turambar, in all
these cases he re-configured the borrowed material to fit his new context.
Where mythology intersected religion he did no less. He specifically objected to “the Arthurian world,” as a candidate for England’s myth since it
was “involved in and explicitly contain[ed] the Christian religion,” which
seemed to him “fatal” (Letters 144). “Myth and fairy-story,” he wrote to
the publisher Milton Waldman, “must, as all art, reflect and contain in
solution elements of moral and religious truth (or error), but not explicit,
not in the known form of the primary ‘real’ world” (Letters 144). The
operative word in this statement is art. Tolkien was writing fiction, not154
Verlyn Flieger
theology. His dismissal of the Arthurian world, a probable allusion to Sir
Thomas Malory’s allegorical Grail section of Le Morte D’Arthur (even in
its toned down translation-adaptation of the French Queste del Sainte Graal)
was a repudiation of its preachy didacticism.
The problem in a work of mythopoeic fiction is how to include “ elements of moral and religious truth (or error)” without inviting association
with this or that familiar system of belief, an inevitable pitfall of which
Tolkien was well aware. Here is an example. His statement to Milton
Waldman that, “there cannot be any ‘story’ without a fall—all stories are
ultimately about the fall” (Letters 147) not only implies a shared language
of belief, but goes beyond such sharing to accept the premise that a story,
by virtue of having a plot, involves some kind of situational imperfection,
a conflict whose resolution provides the story. Yet he was also aware that
in Western Judaeo-Christian tradition, a fall inevitably implies the Fall—
the Eden story, the disobedience in the Garden, God’s punishment, and
man’s expulsion from Paradise into a world of pain and suffering. For a
story hoping to claim any originality, this is too much baggage to carry
without collapsing under the weight, or inevitably turning into another
and more familiar story. Writing as a Christian but trying not to write
about Christianity, Tolkien avoided the pitfall by shifting his fall from
created humanity to the creating beings. He described it to Waldman as
“a fall of Angels,” hastening to add “though quite different in form, of
course, to that of Christian myth” (Letters 147).
Different in form it certainly is, and we may suppose deliberately
so. First of all, it is creation by committee, not by a single Creator. As
Tolkien’s creation story the “Ainulindalë” recounts, the “One,” his fictive godhead, first called Eru and then (by the Elves whose myth this is)
Ilúvatar, proposes a musical theme to “the offspring of his thought” the
Ainur. These “offspring,” separate aspects of “the One,” make of his
theme a “great music” which will be the blueprint for creation, but which
is interrupted when one of their number, the rebellious Melkor, counters
with his own theme. The performance is halted by Ilúvatar and started
again with a new theme. This, too, is interrupted with a counter-theme
by Melkor and halted by Ilúvatar. On the third attempt, Melkor’s theme
is taken up by Ilúvatar and woven in to his own theme so that there are
“two musics progressing at one time.” One is “deep and wide and beautiful, but slow and blended with an immeasurable sorrow,” while the other
is “loud, and vain, and endlessly repeated” (S 17). Tolkien has neatly captured the beauty and poignancy, as well as the pain and suffering of the
world we live in. His fall is made to occur in the very act of creation so
that the world thus set in motion is not, as in the familiar Judaeo-Christian story of Genesis “good” until marred by human error but faulty and
imperfect from the beginning. The obvious parallel has been avoided but155
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
the essential truth has been retained.
Both the truth and the human experience from which it derives—that
the world is flawed, full of surprises, and seldom works the way we want it
to—are dependent on and generative of the words used to express them.
The names for things, as Tolkien well knew, operate to create the very
world they describe. In the present context, such catchwords as luck, accident, chance, happenstance, coincidence, fate, destiny, all seek to name and thus
to capture an aspect of human experience, the ways in which we categorize the ways things happen. They help us to relate to, if not always
to understand, the incomprehensible, uncontrollable forces at work in
our experiences with one another and with the world around us. Words
are important, and an author’s selection and use of words says much
about the worldview he represents. It is therefore worthy of note that
such conceptually significant proper nouns as God, Heaven, Grace, Paradise,
Providence, Salvation, Damnation, do not figure in Tolkien’s major fiction.
Equally worthy of note are the words which do figure, and which in fact
play an important role in the structuring of his world. These include, as
already noted, the noun fate as either a general concept (uncapitalized) or
a proper noun/personification (capitalized), the opposing phrase free will,
as well as related nouns such as doom and choice, and verbs such as choose,
will, shall, and must. These had for Tolkien more specific and special
meanings than those used (rather loosely) in the 21st century. Therefore,
honoring Tolkien’s position as a lover of words and the history of words,
we need to look at where the words come from and what they once signified before we can understand fully what he meant them to mean.
Happened, Spoken, Settled
Among the literatures which he studied and taught, the Old English epic Beowulf was surely Tolkien’s chief, though certainly not his only
lexical model, important both for its heroic and tragic ethos and for the
vocabulary through which that ethos is expressed. A familiar Old English
word, wyrd usually translated “fate,” appears in that poem nine times
(Branston 65).4 It is there spelled in lower case, but can also be spelled
with a capital W and personified, as it is in other Old English poems such
as The Dream of the Rood. The word also appears (capitalized) as Werdys
in the Middle English of Chaucer’s Legend of Good Women (Branston 67),
and culminates in the Shakespearean English of Macbeth’s Weird Sisters.
In the second half of line 455, Beowulf declares Gåð ä wyrd swä hïo scel,
“Fate will go as it must” (l. 455), but later says, Wyrd oft nereð / unfågne eorl,
þonne his ellen dëah, “fate often saves/ an undoomed man [i.e. one not appointed to die] when his courage holds” (ll. 572-73). Compare the more
current aphorism, “God helps those who help themselves.” If the Beowulf
poet could give fate some wiggle-room, Tolkien could (and did) do no156
Verlyn Flieger
less. Just how such wiggle-room might work both in Beowulf and Tolkien’s
own mythology, requires a brief dip into etymology.
Bosworth-Toller’s Anglo-Saxon Dictionary glosses wyrd, related to
the Old English verb weorðan, “to happen or become.” as “What happens, fate, fortune, chance.” Linguistically related is Old Icelandic Urð,
described in Snorri’s Edda as one of the three Norns or Fates, the others
named as Verðandi and Skuld. Urð and Verðandi are respectively the past
and present participles of the Old Icelandic verb verða. Cleasby-Vigfusson’s Icelandic-English Dictionary gives the primary meaning of verða as
“To become, happen, come to pass,” with more specific meaning in sense
IV as denoting necessity: “one must, needs, is forced, obliged to do.” It further
defines Verðandi (capitalized) as “the ‘Being’, the Weird, the name of one of
the Norns.” Both Snorri’s Edda and the earlier Poetic Edda personify Urð
as the guardian of Urð’s Well (Snorri 17; Poetic Edda 9, “Völuspá” verses
19, 20); which lies beneath the root of the World Tree Yggdrasil. Such
personification makes it philologically reasonable to see Urð and Wyrd as
similarly-perceived forces, while Skuld, the present tense-preterite form
of Old Icelandic skulu, implies “that which will have happened.” Related to modern English “shall” or “should,” it is closer in meaning to
“must,” Anglo-Saxon motan, with the force of necessity, and to sense IV
(see above) of Old Icelandic verða.
Fate, the word most frequently used to translate both Wyrd and Urð, is
defined by The American Heritage Dictionary as, “the supposed force,
principle, or power that predetermines events.” It comes from Latin Fata
derived from fätum, the neuter past participle of färï, to speak.” Fate,
then, is what is spoken, that which has been declared to be. And finally,
doom, which in modern English has negative connotations, is derived
from Anglo-Saxon dóm, and means simply “judgment, judicial sentence,
decree.” In both “sentence” and “decree,” then, it is not unlike fate as
“that spoken.” Dictionary definitions can only go so far, however, and it
should be emphasized that they are not absolutes but meanings embedded in the history of the usage of certain words, meanings themselves
subject to subtleties of usage and context. It must be emphasized as well
that the words themselves are not things but only the words for things, the
sometimes ill-fitted handles by which we try to grasp the import of what
we cannot control and do not fully understand.
No one was more aware of this than Tolkien, who declared repeatedly that his legendarium was generated to provide a home for his languages. Thus he built linguistic concepts similar to these real-world examples
into the vocabulary of his invented languages Quenya and Sindarin. An
entry in the very early “Gnomish Lexicon” lists gwalt, †gwalod as “good
luck—any providential occurrence or thought” (Parma 11, p. 44). In the
“Quenya Lexicon,” the later Quenya Amarto, Ambar(rt) is capitalized157
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
(therefore probably personified) as “Fate” (Parma 12, 34). ENGET(OR)
is translated “fate, hap” (35) with engetor listed under the stem NETE as
“fate, luck” (66). ENGETOR also occurs in the Valar name-list (Parma
14, p. 13-14, note 12). Gnomish Bridwen is listed as “fate personified”
(Parma 11, 24), with lower case pridwen with the phrase i-bridwen a-vridwen
glossed as “poetic justice, judgment of fate” (64). The Primitive Eldarin
stem √MBAR (see Amarto above), “to make a decision” (i.e. to choose) occurs in primitive Quenya umbar, “fate,” as in Túrambar “Master of Fate,”
with the verbal base √TUR, “dominate, master, conquer” as a prefix.
Quenya ambar, “world,” is also derived from √MBAR, with the meaning
“settlement or abode,” as in a “decision” about dwelling or occupying
land. Primitive Eldarin ambar(a), Quenya ambar, Sindarin amar, therefore
carried the sense of “settlement, appointed place,” as in the Earth/Arda
as the appointed dwelling or home of the children of Ilúvatar (Parma 17,
104-105). The other derivative of √MBAR, umbar meant an ordinance or
decree and thus the circumstances proceeding from such a decree, and is
not unlike the notion of fate as what is spoken. Used of the dispositions
and will of Eru,
Umbar could thus correspond to History, the known or at least
the already unfolded part, together with the Future, progressively realized. To the latter it most often referred, and is
rendered Fate or Doom. But this is inaccurate, so far as genuine Elvish, especially high-elvish, is concerned, since it was
not in that use applied only to evil events (Tolkien quoted in
Parma 17,105).
It is not difficult to see in Umbar, “fate,” the notion of already-unfolded
History and “the Future, progressively realized” a concept akin to AngloSaxon Wyrd and Norse Urð as “what happens” or “has “happened” or
“will have happened.” Though they are different words, the phonological
connection between umbar, “decree or decision,” and ambar, “appointed
place” recalls Latin Fata in their concept of Arda as the appointed (i.e.
fated) home or dwelling for Elves. They are confined to the circles of the
world while it lasts, whereas Men, who “seek beyond the world and find
no rest therein,” are correspondingly unconfined.
Some of Tolkien’s unpublished notes on Elvish languages, many
written after the publication of The Lord of the Rings, enlarge on such
concepts, and, although they remain in his possession, have been made
available by Christopher Tolkien. These are worth particular attention
for their specifically Elvish perspective on the actions and lives of Men (a
category which includes Hobbits). Only a portion is quoted here, for the
whole is lengthy and detailed, concluding with a move beyond the scope
of the present essentially linguistic discussion into what might better be158
Verlyn Flieger
called theology, consideration of what may be unforeseen or unintended
by characters in the drama, but is still present in the foreknowledge of
Eru.
[O]ne of the Eldar would have said that for all Elves and
Men the shape, condition, and therefore the past and future
physical development and destiny of this ‘earth’ was determined and beyond their power to change, indeed beyond the
power even of the Valar, to alter in any large and permanent
way. ([Marginal note:] They distinguished between “change”
and redirection. Thus any ‘rational [?will-user] could in a
small way move, re-direct, stop, or destroy objects in the
world; but he could not “change” into something else. They
did not confuse analysis with change, e.g. water/steam, oxygen hydrogen.) The Downfall of Númenor was ‘a miracle’
as we might say, or as they a direct action of Eru within time
that altered the previous scheme for all remaining time. They
would probably also have said that Bilbo was ‘fated’ to find
the Ring, but not necessarily to surrender it; and then if Bilbo
surrendered it Frodo was fated to go on his mission, but not
necessarily to destroy the Ring—which in fact he did not do.
They would have added that if the downfall of Sauron and
the destruction of the Ring was part of Fate (or Eru’s plan)
then if Bilbo had retained the Ring and refused to surrender
it, some other means would have arisen by which Sauron
was frustrated. Just as when Frodo’s will proved in the end
inadequate, a means for the Ring’s destruction immediately
appeared—being kept in reserve by Eru as it were.
Tolkien goes on to say that,
They [i.e. Elves] would not have denied that (say) a man was
(may have been) “fated” to meet an enemy of his at a certain time and place, but they would have denied that he was
“fated” then to speak to him in terms of hatred, or to slay
him. “Will” at a certain grade must enter into many of the
complex motions leading to a meeting of persons; but the
Eldar held that only those efforts of “will” were “free” which
were directed to a fully aware purpose.
To point out the obvious, all of this is from the Elvish point of view
and thus reflects what Tolkien intended to be a specifically Elvish understanding of the world. Important here are the subjunctive constructions: “would have said,” “would probably also have said,” “would have159
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
added,” “would not have denied,” all suggest a projection of Elvish perception not just on language but the worldview it expresses. Given that
this discussion is linguistically-based, given further that the languages
and worldview concerned express perspectives generated and spoken by
Elves (albeit invented by Tolkien), it is noteworthy that the entire discussion looks at how Elves “would see” the actions of Men within an Elvish
concept of fate. Indeed, Tolkien was at pains on several occasions to reiterate that the mythology was Elf-generated and thus not anthropocentric. The “high legends of the beginnings are supposed to look at things
through Elvish minds” (Letters 145), and “the point of view of the whole
cycle is the Elvish” (Letters 147).
Greatness Meant
Now to the personal reason. I noted in my opening paragraph that
Tolkien began serious work on his mythology in late 1916. The time is
noteworthy for its proximity to his war experience and thus to the warengendered deaths of two of his three closest friends. Rob Gilson, G.B.
Smith, Christopher Wiseman and Tolkien had formed, when all four
were at King Edward’s School in Birmingham, an informal fellowship
they called the TCBS. 5 This was more than an ordinary gathering of
friends; it was a brotherhood. Continued in their university years, maintained in the face of separation by war postings, the TCBS was a deeply
bonded friendship of like-minded young men who shared a somewhat
inchoate but deeply felt sense of artistic mission. Rob Gilson was killed
on the first day of the Battle of the Somme 1 July 1916. Geoffrey Bache
Smith died behind the lines on 3 December 1916 of wounds from a stray
shell.
By virtue of being the first, Gilson’s death had the most dramatic
effect. Tolkien’s reaction was an almost physical one. “I don’t feel a member of a little complete body now,” he wrote to Smith (Letters 10). “I went
out into the wood . . . last night and also the night before and sat and
thought” (Letters 9). The scene is poignant, and the letter that came out of
it shows Tolkien struggling with the third great loss in his life (his father
when he was not yet four, his mother when he was twelve). Now he was
in more than grief, he was in crisis over what Rob Gilson’s death might
portend for the three surviving members of their fellowship, and for his
own sense of his place in the scheme of things.
The death of one man in a battle where in a single day 20,000 Allied lives were lost and nothing was won moved Tolkien to interrogate
God’s purpose not just for the dead but for the living. “I now believe,”
he wrote to Smith, “that if the greatness which we three certainly meant
(and meant as more than holiness or nobility alone) is really the lot of the
TCBS, then the death of any of its members is but a bitter winnowing of160
Verlyn Flieger
those who were not meant to be great—at least not directly” (Letters 9).6
The repetition with changing connotation of the word meant—”greatness
which we meant,” “meant as more than holiness,” “those not meant to be
great”; the shifts from meant as “understood” to meant as “signified,” to
meant as “intended”— suggest a quest for certainty as well as for meaning. Was Gilson not “meant” to be “great” because he was killed? Was he
killed because he was not meant to be great?
Unexpressed but implied is the inevitable personal corollary: was
Tolkien alive because he was “meant” to be alive? “Meant” to be great?
While Tolkien was still in England, Smith, already in combat in France,
had urged him to publish his poems., declaring that Tolkien was “chosen
like Saul among the Children of Israel,” and if he [Smith] were to be
“scuppered” [killed], there would still be “a member of the great TCBS
to voice what I dreamed and what we all agreed upon” (Garth 118).
Now Gilson, not Smith, had died, and Tolkien’s sense “that the TCBS
was destined to testify for God and Truth” (Letters 10) was called into
question. What did destined mean? What did chosen mean? 7 Were their
lives and their ambitions in their own hands to direct? Or were they, as
events now overwhelmingly suggested, controlled by forces greater than
any individual? And if that was so, how did their hopes and dreams fit
into whatever larger scheme held sway?
Not long afterward, Tolkien fell sick with trench fever and was sent
back to England. Here he got the news that G.B. Smith was also gone,
like Gilson, killed in France; unlike Gilson, not in battle but by fragments
from a stray artillery shell behind the lines. Although Smith’s wounds
were not life-threatening, they turned gangrenous, and he died four days
after he was injured, doomed because of a random explosion not aimed
at him. He and Tolkien had shared a particularly strong bond of like talents and ambitions. Both were poets, both critiqued one another’s work,
both had ambitions for publication. After the war, Tolkien saw to it that
Smith’s poems were posthumously published as A Spring Harvest, the title
a consciously ironic choice for the work of a young poet cut down before
he could ripen.
In the context of the hoped-for “destiny” of their fellowship, Tolkien’s own aspirations were then and afterward tangled with his feelings
of grief and loss and his struggle to see meaning in what had happened,
a struggle which would find an outlet in his own writing. In the years
leading up to the war he had been at work, albeit sporadically, on a body
of poetry loosely focused on what he called “the Lonely Isle”—later to
become Tol Eressea and later still Valinor—but not yet coalesced into a
structured mythology. Christopher Wiseman had written to him “You
ought to start the epic” (Carpenter 90). Reprieved from war by illness, he
now began seriously to consider the direction of his own writing.161
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
I do not propose that Tolkien came home from war and consciously
sat down to recreate his experience in words.8 Unlike the war writers of
his generation such as Edmund Blunden, Wilfrid Owen, Robert Graves,
and Siegfried Sassoon (all of whom did exactly that), Tolkien turned instead to mythology, then fairy tale, lastly fantasy, and filtered his experience through the gauze of his imagination. Moreover, his most powerful
depiction of the horror of war and its effect on those who fight it—the
long ordeal of Frodo Baggins in The Lord of the Rings—emerged only
years later and then in a conspicuously different frame. Filtering and
delay notwithstanding, it is surely no accident that it was in 1916-17 and
in the aftermath of two specific losses that Tolkien began the story of an
unending war and its never-ending consequences, a legendarium that
would as it developed come to explore the interweaving of human desires
and impulses with a fixed and overarching design.
The earliest stories—“The Fall of Gondolin,” an unabashed war-story written in 1916-17, “The Tale of Tinuviel,” a love-story in a war setting written in 1917, “The Music of the Ainur,” a creation story written
some time between 1918 and 1920, and “Turambar and the Foalókë,”
an epic tragedy centered on warfare, and in existence by 1919— all came
in the four years directly following his own war experience. While they
would develop and change in the ensuing years, they did not alter their
essential nature, and formed the vital heart of his “mythology for England,” the “Silmarillion”.
I am aware that biographical criticism is a perilous realm, with pitfalls for the unwary and dungeons for the overbold. The presence of
biographical elements in a work of art is easy to overemphasize, and too
much attention to such elements has the deleterious effect of privileging the creator over the work created. Such concerns notwithstanding, it
would be naive and unrealistic to assume that the formative events of an
author’s life play a minor part in his creative process. To acknowledge the
influence on his writing of an author’s reading and at the same time to
discount the influence of his immediate experience seems arbitrary and
unnecessarily exclusive.
The Music and the Task
The sub-creative reason behind Tolkien’s paradox will take us to the
“Silmarillion” for a look at the earliest and subsequent versions of his
creation story, the “Ainulindalë.” This story, among the first he wrote, sets
up the parameters for his Secondary World, parameters which remained,
in one particular stipulation, unchanged throughout the course of many
revisions. The first version, “The Music of the Ainur,” was begun according to Christopher Tolkien between November 1918 and spring 1920
and set the tone for what was to follow. The theme of creation proposed162
Verlyn Flieger
by the godhead Ilúvatar and orchestrated by the Ainur is broken by the
discord of the rebellious Melko, who introduces an independent theme
of his own. The disharmony thus introduced creates the world, for after
absorbing Melko’s theme into his own, Ilúvatar proclaims “Eä! Let these
things be!” (S 20). The world thus brought into being is “a new thing: Eä,
the World that Is”(20). The final verb is important. Eä is not the World
that Should Be, or the World that Ought to Have Been, but the world that Is.
It is a portrait in music of the real world as it really appears—unfinished,
conflicted, containing harmony and discord, love and hate, war and
peace. To this picture, Ilúvatar adds a surprise component—his Children, the two races of Elves and Men which come direct from him, with
but not in the third theme. The earliest, “hastily-pencilled” draft says:
“. . . to Men I [Ilúvatar] will appoint a task and give a great
gift.” And he devised that they should have free will and the
power of fashioning and designing beyond the original music of the Ainu, that by reason of their operations all things
shall in shape and deed be fulfilled, and the world that comes
of the music of the Ainu be completed unto the last and
smallest” (Lost Tales I 61).
This singling out of Men for something extra is explicit and must be
deliberate. Men can transcend the Music. Their gift is free will, and their
task is through the exercise thereof to “complete” and “fulfill” the heretofore unfinished Music. This is fine for Men, but what about Elves?
Their omission from this proclamation is obvious, and its implication
significant. A second text, fuller, written in ink, and dated to the same
period, spells it out,
“ . . . when the Eldar come they will be the fairest and most
lovely . . . .But to Men I will give a new gift, and a greater.”
Therefore he [Ilúvatar] devised that Men should have a free
virtue whereby within the limits of the powers and substances and chances of the world they might fashion and design
their life beyond even the original Music of the Ainur that is
as fate to all things else (Lost Tales I 59).
The conjunctions “but” and “therefore” convey consequentiality, the
words “as fate” define the Music, and the sweeping “all things else” must
by default include Elves. The change of “will” to “virtue,” with the retention of “free” says the same thing more obliquely. Tolkien is here using
the word virtue not in its usual sense of moral excellence but in the older,
now obsolete sense of “particular power, efficacy,” definition # 11 in the
Oxford English Dictionary. Nonetheless, this free virtue is still bestowed163
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
only on Men. I propose that the free virtue/will of Men is Ilúvatar’s
wild card, and can affect fate. In thirty years of re-vision this plan never
changed. Of the “Ainulindalë” Christopher Tolkien has written that,
there is a direct tradition, manuscript to manuscript, from
the earliest draft to the final version: each text is directly
based on the one preceding. Moreover, and most remarkably, the earliest version, written when my father was 27 or
28 and embedded still in the context of the Cottage of Lost
Play, was so evolved in its conception that it underwent little
change of an essential kind. . . . the fall of the original sentences can continually be recognized in the last version of
the Ainulindalë, written more than thirty years later, and even
many phrases survived. (Lost Tales I 61-62)
Another version, called by Christopher Tolkien Ainulindalë B and dated
to “between 1930 and the end of 1937” (Lost Road 107), keeps the same
plan.
In the following years Tolkien wrote a further series of revisions called
by Christopher Ainulindalë C*, C and D (Morgoth 3-4, 36-43). In all these
revisions the relevant passage remains essentially intact. Although he
cautions there is “no proof ” that Tolkien was working on a revision of
the “Ainulindalë” as early as 1946, Christopher cites “a torn half-sheet”
with a passage from “Ainulindalë” among the “notes and jottings on the
Adûnaic language” adjunct to the 1946 Notion Club Papers (Morgoth 4).
More reliably, he says there is “certain evidence” that Ainulindalë C*
“was in existence by 1948” (Morgoth 4). The version in The Silmarillion of
1977, the one most familiar to most readers, is expanded from but in all
essentials the same as the preceding versions.
‘the Quendi . . . shall have and shall conceive and bring forth
more beauty than all my Children; and they shall have the
greater bliss in this world. But to the Atani I will give a new
gift.’ Therefore he willed that the hearts of Men should seek
beyond the world and should find no rest therein; but they
should have a virtue to shape their life, amid the powers and
chances of the world, beyond the Music of the Ainur, which
is as fate to all things else; and of their operation everything
should be, in form and deed, completed, and the world fulfilled unto the last and smallest. (S 41-42)
Elves will have beauty. They will have greater bliss “in this world.” But
the specific and explicit “virtue” to shape their lives is reserved for Men.
The scope of that “virtue,” however, is left undefined. “Go beyond” does164
Verlyn Flieger
not necessarily mean that Men always use free will, just that they have
license to. Rather than prescribing free will as a constant factor, Ilúvatar
simply allows for its operation. Nor will Men always choose rightly. While
this is addressed most explicitly in the early “Ainulindalë,” the notion carries over in all the versions with the provision that Men, “being set amid
the turmoils of the powers of the world, would stray often, and would
not use their gifts in harmony” (S 42). Tolkien’s vision encompasses the
obvious fact that not only are good intentions not always enough, they
can sometimes—and, in the case of a character like Túrin Turambar,
often—lead to apparently bad outcomes.
Nevertheless, it is important to recognize the remarkable consistency
with Tolkien has retained Ilúvatar’s declaration. Men have free will. All
things else, including Elves, are ruled by fate. As noted above, this is hard
for readers to accept, and perhaps accounts for the fact that this aspect
of the “Ainulindalë” has been under-examined by scholars of Tolkien’s
work. Dan Timmons’ article on “Free Will” in Tolkien Encyclopedia notes
that “Ilúvatar . . . grants beings the ability to contribute to the “Music”
according to their “will” (Encyclopedia 221), but does not identify those
“beings” as Men, or note that Ilúvatar’s grant excludes “all things else.”
In Tolkien and the Great War, John Garth correctly observes, “Whereas the
cosmogonic Music prescribed the fate of the Elves . . . humans were
granted a ‘free virtue” to act beyond it” (Garth 275) but adds that, “Tolkien seems not to have tried to illustrate the implication that the Elves,
the Valar, and Melko lack free will, which would surely have blighted his
narrative” (275).9 Others have voiced much the same objection. Three
essays in vol. 1 of the recently-published Tolkien and Modernity (Weinreich,
Fisher, and Fornet-Ponse) argue that both Elves and Men have free will.
Only one (Fornet-Ponse) addresses the crucial statement by Ilúvatar, and
then only to declare that it “contradicts the whole structure of The Silmarillion” (Tolkien and Modernity, 183). Therefore, in this reading, Ilúvatar
could not possibly have meant what he said. This is most people’s reaction, and one of the major reasons I am writing now.
However, it is one thing to parse the “Ainulindalë,” quite another to
show its consequences in action. Ilúvatar’s statement in all its versions
seems simple, declarative, unequivocal. Its playing-out in the actions and
interactions of characters within the story, however, is murky and deliberately ill-defined. It is when we leave the concept and look at its practice
that the notion becomes problematic, and Tolkien has—I think wisely—allowed it to be so. He was not designing an inter-office flow chart
by which responsibility could clearly be traced from one department to
another; he was creating characters and situations through which he
hoped to show how confusing the complex interaction of competing but
interactive forces can be to actors and beholders alike. It would be both165
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
taxing and tedious if the reader had continually to be deciding if this
or that action was the result of fate or free will. Moreover, such assignment would, if carried to its extreme, reduce the Elves to automata in
a clockwork universe, moved by some external though hidden force. It
would rob their actions, and consequently their story, of all narrative
uncertainty and all readerly suspense.
Furthermore, it is important to remember that Tolkien’s characters
and situations are his inventions. They are not real people in a real world,
but fictive characters in an arbitrary and invented one. In that sense they
are all fated, their actions determined by their author’s plan.10 They have
no independent existence, no lives beyond what the text gives them, no
autonomy separate from Tolkien’s intent. We cannot inquire what this or
that character “would do” in a given situation, only accept what he or she
actually does in the situation created by the author. And those situations
are designed to reflect humanity’s confusing perceptions of the operations of the real world. For while the narrative voice sometimes alludes
to a character’s “fate” (most clearly in the tale of Beren and Lúthien, but
also in the story of Túrin Turambar11), the characters themselves, with
two exceptional instance to be discussed below, nowhere make it explicit
that any one of them is consciously invoking free will or fate.
The few statements which seem to indicate free will are spoken by the
characters themselves (for example, Frodo’s “I will take the Ring” at the
Council of Elrond). Likewise, statements implying an external controlling force—for example Gandalf ’s comment to Frodo that “something
else” was at work (though he does not say what) in Bilbo’s finding of the
Ring, or his further statement that Bilbo was “meant to find the Ring” in
which case Frodo also was “meant to have it” (FR, I, ii, 65)—seem deliberately vague and obscure. They recall Tolkien’s comment, cited above,
that Elves “would have said” that Bilbo was ‘fated’ to find the Ring but
not necessarily fated to surrender it. These are presumptive Elvish interpretations of events made at second hand and after the fact. Within
the narrative, Bilbo’s finding of the Ring is made to seem accident or
chance, while his surrender of it is portrayed as a reluctant act of will
(Bilbo needs a little help from his friend). Tolkien was first of all trying to
depict the complex, often impulsive and unpremeditated ways in which
we respond to circumstances, ways in which separate people’s separate
actions perforce impinge upon one another and upon the world around
them. Second, he was offering a structure within which those actions
could be both framed and accounted for—the paradox introduced at the
beginning of this discussion.
In support of that paradox, and operating on the assumption that
Tolkien intended Ilúvatar to mean what he said, I will move now to some
illustrative examples. These, I hope, will demonstrate that Ilúvatar’s166
Verlyn Flieger
original statement, far from “contradicting” or “blighting” The Silmarillion, instead enriches and complexifies it, and furthermore that it enriches
and complexifies its continuation which is Tolkien’s masterpiece, The Lord
of the Rings. I have chosen to look at the curious case of Fëanor and the
Silmarils, at the conflicted triad of Beren, Lúthien and Thingol,12 and to
examine in some detail Tolkien’s handling of key moments of decision
in the representations of Aragorn, Sam Gamgee, and the dyad of Frodo
and Gollum.13
The “Silmarillion”
Fëanor Against the Valar
As an Elvish example I offer the most exceptional of the instances
cited above, the perplexing passage in The Silmarillion wherein, after the
Darkening of Valinor, Yavanna asks Fëanor to give her the Silmarils to
renew the Two Trees. His response is explicit and noteworthy. “This
thing I will not do of free will” (S 79). If we are to believe Ilúvatar, Fëanor
does not have free will, thus its deliberate introduction here is confusing—superfluous if Fëanor has free will, and even more superfluous if he
doesn’t. Or else Tolkien is making a point. I choose to think he’s making
a point, and that he intends the phrase to operate at two different levels.
One level is Fëanor’s, his response to his perceived coercion by the Valar
to give up the jewels. The other, larger level is Tolkien’s, for when the
tidings come that Melkor has stolen the Silmarils, he, in the voice of the
narrator, adds the otherwise unnecessary comment that, “The Silmarils
had passed away, and all one it may seem whether Fëanor had said yea
or nay to Yavanna; yet had he said yea at the first, before the tidings came
from Formenos, it may be that his after deeds would have been other
than they were. But now the Doom of the Noldor drew near” (S 79).
This, as I read the situation, is exactly Tolkien’s point. Fëanor is fated
to lose the Silmarils, and the Silmarils are fated to pass out of his keeping.
He could not give them to Yavanna if he chose, for they are no longer his.
But the editorial addendum implies that his answer to Yavanna, regardless of whether he could act on it, would affect his subsequent actions.
While Christopher Tolkien includes this comment in “The Later Quenta
Silmarillion” as published in Morgoth (295), the passage does not appear in
the earlier “Quenta Silmarillion” as given in The Lost Road. Here Fëanor,
“distraught with grief for the slaying of his father, and anguish for the
rape of the Silmarils,” vows to pursue Morgoth (Lost Road. 234). The
Oath of Fëanor and the flight of the Noldor are essentially as in The
Silmarillion.
Three verb forms are critical in The Silmarillion’s version: the subjunctive “had he said” and the conditional “it may be” and “would have167
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
been.” All three convey a sense of contingency, the possibility that things
might have turned out differently. But could they? Could Fëanor have
said otherwise than he said, done otherwise than he did? How much is
in the Music? It seems wyrd in all senses of the word. Tolkien has again
muddied the waters by suggesting that if Fëanor’s response had been different, that difference might have affected his subsequent deeds. But now
(my emphasis) his choice brings on the Doom of the Nolder. Free will can
apparently invite fate. As noted earlier, doom is derived from Anglo-Saxon dòm. While its primary meaning is: “I. judgment, decree, ordinance,
law,” it has also a rare usage listed as IV. “Will, free will, choice, option”
(Bosworth-Toller). Thus Fëanor’s impracticable choice to deny Yavanna
the Silmarils, and his consequent oath to pursue Morgoth bring on the
choice of the Noldor to follow him, which leads to their Doom. Though
that doom is spoken in the voice of Mandos, it is the Noldor who in effect
doom themselves.
If, as Ilúvatar decrees and as I argue, Fëanor is bound by the Music,
his “after deeds” must be in that Music, therefore not subject to change.
How then, could those deeds have been “other” than they were? The
parallel passage from the Later, post-Lord of the Rings version of the Quenta
Silmarillion written in 1951-52 (Morgoth 141) reads, “had he said yea at the
first, and so cleansed his heart ere the dreadful tidings came, his after deeds
would have been other than they proved” [my emphasis] (Morgoth 295). Here the
potential for change in Fëanor is explicit; to have said “yea” would have
“cleansed” his heart, which because of his intransigent “nay” remained
filled with anger and resentment. The unequivocal comment that his
deeds “would have been other” is far stronger than the conditional “it
may be.” But the question remains: how might his deeds have “been
other” if they were in the Music? The problem seems deliberately unsolvable, but Tolkien’s word other may offer a solution. Traditionally an
adjective modifying a noun, other is here employed in its rarer adverbial
usage of “otherwise, differently, in another way” as modifying a verb,
in this case the implied verb done, as in “after deeds have been [done]”
otherwise.
Tolkien may be saying that while the deeds themselves would inevitably be done, Fëanor’s “yea”—if he had said it—could have changed
his motive and perhaps his way of doing them. In that case, their quality
might have turned out to be “other” than they “proved.” The distinction,
like that between killing for revenge and killing in self-defense, is in the
motive behind the act. In the case of Fëanor the distinction is between
getting back the Silmarils to be “lords of the unsullied light” (S 83), and
recovering them to re-illumine Valinor. That in the end he cannot do
either does not invalidate or alter Tolkien’s point. I offer this as the best
rationale I can think of for that otherwise inexplicable and unnecessary168
Verlyn Flieger
coda in two separate versions. It seems clear that Tolkien felt the addition
served a purpose. Fate—the Music—cannot be changed by an Elf. Thus,
the Silmarils are gone, their fate already decided and out of Fëanor’s
control. But his interior psychology could be changed, and that change
could affect the nature of his subsequent actions.
Aragorn at the Falls
My Mannish example is Aragorn, who at the Falls of Rauros is
forced to make a choice with too little information to go on. Realizing
that Frodo is gone and Merry and Pippin have been captured, Aragorn
must choose what to do next. His options are: to follow Frodo, to keep his
promise to Boromir to go to Minas Tirith, to rescue Merry and Pippin.
There is no easy or obvious choice, and his emotionally charged dialogue
with himself signals his confusion and ambivalence. Hearing Boromir’s
horn as he comes down from the high seat he laments his absence from
this crisis. “Alas! An ill fate is on me this day and all that I do goes amiss”
(TT, III, i, 15). Faced subsequently with Boromir’s dying injunction to
go to Minas Tirith, Aragorn asks without expectation of answer “What
shall I do now?” (16).
Shall is here more than a simple future tense; it has, especially in the
personified form of Old Norse Skuld, the force of skulu with its connotation of something already decided. Aragorn is questioning fate, and
again comments, “All that I have done today has gone amiss”(17). Torn
between following the Ringbearer or going after Merry and Pippin, he
declares, “An evil choice is now before us” (17), and finally, deciding to
follow the young hobbits, says, “now may I make a right choice and
change the evil fate of this unhappy day” (21). Unhappy,” here, does not
mean “sad,” but “unfortunate, unlucky,” the older, medieval usage as
given in definition 4 under unhappy in the OED, “Of conditions: marked
by misfortune or mishap.” Aragorn’s words constitute the closest the narrative comes to making explicit the interaction between the two forces,
and is the only direct reference I can think of in The Lord of the Rings to
the power of Men to go beyond the Music. It is significant for its clear
implication that Aragorn is aware this power. A more oblique reference
comes only a few pages later, when in answer to Éomer’s question “What
doom do you bring out of the North?” Aragorn replies, “The doom of
Choice” (TT, III, ii, 36).
Thingol, Beren, Lúthien
Let us move now to the more complex interactions of Elves with
Men. When free-willed Man meets fated Elf, who does what to whom?
Tolkien has left the answers deliberately opaque. The story of Beren,
Lúthien and Thingol is the most tangled, for here Tolkien has inverted169
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
the language, using “fate” and “doom” for Beren and “free” for Lúthien,
which makes it difficult to figure out who is doing what to whom. I argue that this is deliberate, intended to reflect the confused and confusing
perceptions that characterize Tolkien’s internal story-tellers, in this case
those of his fictive bard, Daeron the minstrel. (It is also worth noting
that Beren was originally an Elf and was later changed to a Man.) Beren
comes to Doriath because it is “put into his heart that he would go down
into the Hidden Kingdom.” He passes through the mazes Melian has
woven as she foretold, for “a great doom lay upon him.” As Lúthien looks
on Beren “doom fell upon her, and she loved him” (S 164-65). Of Beren’s
meeting with Lúthien Tolkien writes that, “he [Beren] began the payment of anguish for the fate that was laid on him; and in his fate Lúthien
was caught, and being immortal she shared his mortality; and being free
received his chain” (S 165-66).
This is piling contradiction on paradox. Lúthien is described as “being free.” But free from what? Beren has a fate that “was laid on him.”
By whom? Are we to understand that Beren is fated and Lúthien has
free will? Beren tells Thingol that his “fate” led him to Doriath, where
he found what he “sought not,” that is, Lúthien. Melian’s statement that,
“not by you [i.e. Thingol] shall Beren be slain; and far and free does his
fate lead him, yet it is wound with yours” (167) muddies the water even
further, yet the word “free” in this context, juxtaposed against “fate,” suggests that Beren’s fate is to make a free choice. If that is the case, however,
freedom to choose doesn’t always work. When he cuts the Silmaril from
Morgoth’s crown “it came into Beren’s mind” (cp. “it was put into his
heart” above) that he would go beyond his vow and take all three. “But,”
the narrative, is at pains to point out, “such was not the doom of the
Silmarils.” The knife snaps, Morgoth stirs, and Beren and Lúthien flee
with one Silmaril.
Let us suppose, since that is “what happens,” (i.e. wyrd) that Thingol’s
fate in the Music is to die by violence.14 That fate is directed by the free action of Beren, a Man whose appearance in Doriath and love for Lúthien
arouse Thingol’s anger and spark his request for a Silmaril, which leads
to his obsession with the jewel which in turn leads to his death. That
this death does not come about as a direct result of Lúthien’s marriage
to Beren but takes place years later and under other circumstances, is
evidence of Tolkien’s method of “winding” Thingol’s fate with Beren’s
free will. Beren’s free acceptance of Thingol’s demand brings Thingol
a Silmaril and wins Beren Lúthien, while Thingol’s fated possession of
the jewel becomes his doom as his greed conjoins the Silmaril and the
Dwarf-necklace, leads to his quarrel with the Dwarves, and results in his
death at their hands. The point seems to be simply that the choices of
Men can trigger the fates of Elves and the fates of Elves can tilt the lives170
Verlyn Flieger
of Men, while both can affect the world they both inhabit.
Turning now from Elves and (Big) Men to Hobbits, my examples will
show Tolkien working even more precisely at the lexical level, and will
illustrate his careful and exact use of language, especially three verbs—
will, shall, and must, whose history I have already discussed—as well as
choice, choose, and fate.
Samwise at the High Pass
My first Hobbit example is Sam Gamgee. It is not by accident that
an important chapter in the plot’s development is titled “The Choices of
Master Samwise.” Finding Frodo’s dead (as he thinks) body, Sam goes
through an agony of indecision over how to respond. His first despairing
question to himself is “What shall I do, what shall I do” (TT, II, x, 340).
His options are to go home, to stay with Frodo, to kill Gollum, to kill
himself, or to take the Ring and go on. He has no information that will
help him to make a right decision. Having considered and rejected the
first four options, Sam then considers “the hard answer,” which is to take
Frodo’s burden and go on to the Cracks of Doom. The key words will
and must follow one another now in rapid succession as Sam tells himself
“I must make up my own mind. I will make it up” (341).
Knowing the precision with which Tolkien uses words, and the weight
of internal historical evidence that lies behind them, we can see that
Sam is not merely lecturing himself; he is unknowingly invoking both
his destiny and his free will. He must make up his own mind. He must
think for himself. He must choose to do. Nonetheless, Tolkien shows him
still indecisive. “I’ve made up my mind,” he says to himself, but the narrative adds, that “he had not,” moreover, that “what he was doing was
altogether against the grain of his nature.” This leads Sam to self-doubt.
“Have I got it wrong?” he asks, and then, as if there were someone present to tell him: “what ought I to have done?” (342). Sam’s dilemma is that
of someone facing a job he does not want but knows he has to do.
That having decided, he then changes his mind and starts back to
Frodo, is not so much evidence of Sam’s vacillation as of Tolkien’s intent to underscore the perennial human problem of how to act in light
of too little information. The missing information, that Frodo is alive,
leads Sam to his last and most practical question. “Now what is to be
done?” (350) The difference between his earlier, despairing, semi-rhetorical “what ought I to have done?” and the pragmatic, down-to-business,
“what is to be done?” is more than grammatical. The later phrase implies
acknowledgment that there is a task appointed, while the former indicates helplessness, indecision, and despair.171
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
Frodo and Gollum in the Looking-Glass
My last example is the dyad of Gollum and Frodo, who within themselves and with each other best embody Tolkien’s fate-free will conjunction. When the Council of Elrond learns that Gollum has escaped the
Wood-elves and is again on the loose, Gandalf reacts dismissively. “Well,
well. He is gone. We have no time to seek for him again.” And then he
adds what seems an unnecessary tag: “He must do what he will” (FR,
II, ii, 269). This says it all. Tolkien has placed Gollum at a nexus of fate
and free will in which each acts on the other and both act on Gollum.
His wish (willan) for the Ring becomes necessity (motan), controlling his
subsequent actions, especially his last and most desperate action at the
Cracks of Doom. He is fated to follow his own desire. Gandalf ’s statement foreshadows Frodo’s similar but opposite declaration on Amon
Hen. Released from the Eye of Sauron on Amon Hen, and in the liberation of being “free to choose” to take off the Ring, Frodo declares, “I
will do now what I must” (FR, II, x, 417). In both their similarity and difference the two statements mirror one another, and both derive directly
from Ilúvatar’s pronouncement concerning fate and free will at the close
of the “Ainulindalë”.
Tolkien clearly shows Frodo, Gollum’s opposite and alter ego, voluntarily (willan) committing himself to the fate (motan) appointed for him.
His free will accepts his fate. Other examples are easily passed over in
the flow of the narrative, but stand out clearly when words like fate, choice,
must, and will are highlighted. At the Falls of Rauros, when the Company
must decide which way to go from there, Aragorn tells Frodo that even if
Gandalf were there to advise them, “the choice would still wait on you.
Such is your fate” (FR, II, x, 412). Finding the Black Gate of Mordor
closed, Frodo accepts Gollum’s suggestion that they take the secret path
of Cirith Ungol. “I must trust you once more,” he tells Gollum. “Indeed
it seems that I must do so, and that it is my fate to receive help from you,
where I least looked for it, and your fate to help me whom you long pursued with evil purpose” (TT, IV, iii, 248). Responding to Sam’s suspicions
both of him and the secret path, Gollum states that “If master says I must
go or I will go, then he must try some way” (TT, IV, iii, 251)
That he and Gollum both freely participate in the Ring’s destiny to
arrive at the Cracks of Doom shows their free will collaborating with its
fate. Doom and choice, must and will are interlocking systems, cogs turned
“by small hands” which move the wheels of the world while “the eyes
of the great are elsewhere “ (FR, II, ii, 283). The final confrontation
at the Cracks of Doom brings the conflict down to a contest of “small
hands”—Frodo’s hand now wearing the Ring and Gollum’s hands as
they “draw upward to his mouth” and then “[hold] aloft the Ring” as he172
Verlyn Flieger
falls into the fire (RK, VI, iii, 224). But the wheels of the world are turned
as much by words as by hands large or small, and it is in his words that
we must look for clues to Tolkien’s design. The key lies in Frodo’s “I will”
at Rivendell, where he reluctantly volunteers for a job he does not want,
and does not think he can do. “I will take the Ring,” he announces, and
the narrative adds the significant comment, “as if some other will was using his small voice” (FR, II, ii, 284). Given what we know about the background mythology and the intent of Ilúvatar for Men it seems reasonable
to interpret this “other will” as Ilúvatar’s. But Ilúvatar’s will was to give
Men free will. His will in this instance, therefore, must be that Frodo, like
Beren, make a free choice. To complicate the matter, Frodo’s “I will” is
modified by Elrond’s “this task is appointed for you, Frodo,” echoing
in what is surely no accident Ilúvatar’s, “to Men I will appoint a task.”
Elrond’s comment that, “if you take it freely, I will say that your choice
is right” (284), suggests that the rightness lies not just in acceptance of
the task of carrying the Ring but also (though Frodo is unaware of it) in
acceptance of the “task” of Men that is to transcend the Music.
The Ring, however, like the Silmarils and “all things else,” is bound
by the Music, making it difficult to interpret this situation except as the
interjection of free will into the operation of fate. Frodo’s journey, and
its yet-to-be-decided outcome, will affect the fate of all Middle-earth.
Nowhere will this appear more completely than in the fate of Elves. Galadriel states it plainly to Frodo,
Do you not see now wherefore your coming is to us as the
footsteps of Doom? For if you fail, then we are laid bare to
the Enemy. Yet if you succeed, then our power is diminished,
and Lothlórien will fade and the tides of Time will sweep it
away. (FR, II, vii, 380)
At the other end of Frodo’s journey, as he claims the Ring at the
Cracks of Doom, he again makes a declarative statement, now reversing
his words at Amon Hen. “I do not choose now to do what I came to do.
I will not do this deed” (RK, VI, iii, 223). It seems a backhanded exercise
of free will—to choose not to do. Nevertheless, the fact that in the manuscript this sentence is written above the line, replacing an earlier “I cannot do what I have come to do” (Marquette Archive Series 3, Box 8, Roll
11, p. 39), makes it clear that Tolkien intended that Frodo, as Christopher
Tolkien points out, “fully willed his act” (Sauron 38). And although Christopher also comments that he “does not think that the difference is very
significant,” it is notable that Frodo’s “I will not do this deed” harks back
not just to his statement on Amon Hen but also to his earlier declaration
at the Council of Elrond. It is at Mount Doom, in a climactic intersection of will and must, that the task appointed for Frodo, who now will not173
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
“do what he must,” is inadvertently accomplished by Gollum, who must
follow his will, wrest the Ring from Frodo and carry it where it is fated to
go—into the fire. Frodo’s and Gollum’s inadvertent yet combined actions
at the Cracks of Doom, actions of will both inevitable and spontaneous,
between them operate to save Middle-earth.
The Point of the Paradox
This leads back to my opening why, and Tolkien’s sub-creative rationale for his green sun paradox, which was to provide a plausible mechanism for change in an ordered universe. The Lord of the Rings’s dramatic
resolution in the destruction of the Ring by the conflicting and freelywilled actions of Frodo and Gollum points thematically toward the telos,
the final end of Tolkien’s paradox. Tolkien described this telos as, “a vision of the end of the world, its breaking and remaking, and the recovery
of the Silmarilli and the ‘light before the Sun’—after a final battle which
owes, I suppose, more to the Norse vision of Ragnarök than to anything
else, though it is not much like it” (Letters 149). Although at the story
level he never reached this point, the concept makes clear that he envisioned an apotheosis in which the discord of the original Music would
be harmonized in the Second Music, which explicitly includes Men in
its performance. This is made clear in his letter to Waldman, where he
states explicitly that “[t]he making, and nature, of the Children of God”,
the “two chief secrets” of “the Creator” withheld from the Valar, are
intended “partly to redress the evil of the rebel Melkor, partly for the
completion of all” (Letters 147). All the evidence points to his clear intention for Men to join in the Second Music, in which the themes will be
played aright because the task of Men has been to enable that playing.
The Silmarillion states, “of old the Valar declared to the Elves in Valinor
that Men shall join in the Second Music of the Ainur; whereas Ilúvatar
has not revealed what he purposes for the Elves after the world’s end, and
Melkor has not discovered it” (S 42). That this was Tolkien’s plan from
the beginning is clear from a similar passage in the second 1919-20 draft
in The Book of Lost Tales I which states that, “Never was there before, nor
has there been since, such a music . . . though it is said that a mightier far
shall be woven before the seat of Ilúvatar by the choirs of both the Ainur
and the sons of Men after the Great End. Then shall Ilúvatar’s mightiest
themes be played aright; for then Ainur and Men will know his mind and
heart as well as may be, and all his intent” (Lost Tales I 53). It seems clear
that in this “mightier far” music the “mightiest themes” will be played
aright because the actions and choices of Men will have enabled their
playing. The role of Elves in this finale is deliberately left obscure, for
“while the Sons of Men will after the passing of things of a certainty join
in the Second Music of the Ainur, what Ilúvatar has devised for the Eldar174
Verlyn Flieger
beyond the world’s end he has not revealed” (Lost Tales I 59-60).
I mentioned earlier that the words God, Heaven, Grace, Paradise, Providence, Salvation, Damnation, make no appearance in the mythology. Nor
does the word Redemption. Like the others, it is a name for a concept for
which Tolkien chose his own term, free will. By free actions over many
years, his free-willed Men will have changed the Music and the world
from what it is to what it has the potential to be. They will have fulfilled
and completed the world and brought it to its intended but unforeseen
apotheosis. Acting individually, sometimes acting wrongly, and acting always in ignorance of the ultimate outcome of their choices, they will
over the course of time have the totality of their actions exert a selfcorrecting function that will lead them—and the Elves whose lives they
intersect—to the right purpose and fulfillment of the Music of creation.
While the inevitable comparison is with Saint Augustine’s notion of the
Fortunate Fall that expels humankind from Paradise but brings it the
hope of heaven, the differences between Tolkien’s imaginative vision and
Augustine’s Judaeo-Christian one are important. In Tolkien’s work the
Fall is Melkor’s, not Adam’s. Tolkien’s sub-created cosmos has no Paradise from which humanity is driven out, only a world flawed in the making into which they are introduced in order to change it. Elves and Men
will carry the responsibility for illustrating, both in their interactions with
one another and across the gap that divides them, just how living in an
imperfect world might serve a larger plan.
The post-Lord of the Rings Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth, according to
Christopher Tolkien written some time in 1959 (Morgoth 304) supports
this view. In a dialogue about death, the human woman Andreth remarks, “among us some hold that our errand here was to heal the Marring of Arda” and “‘Arda Healed’ (or Remade) shall not be ‘Arda Unmarred’, but a third thing and a greater” (Morgoth 351). Ilúvatar’s original
theme corrupted by Melkor into the Music would be replaced the Second Music when the themes of Ilúvatar would be played “aright.” A
late linguistic commentary by Tolkien published in Parma Eldalamberon
XVII, Words, Phrases & Passages in “The Lord of the Rings,” gives additional
corroboration. His discussion of “The Knowledge of the Valar, or Elvish
ideas and theories concerned with them” contains the following highly
relevant comments:
There was, however, one element in the design of Eru [Ilú-
vatar] that remained a mystery: the Children of Eru, Elves
and Men, the Incarnate. These were said to have been an addition made by Eru himself after the Revelation to the primal
spirits of the Great Design.”
The same passage notes further that,175
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
Another purpose they [Elves and Men] had, which remained
a mystery to the Valar, was to complete the Design by ‘healing’ the hurts which it suffered, and so ultimately not to recover ‘Arda Unmarred’ (that is the world as it would have
been if Evil had never appeared) but the far greater thing
‘Arda Healed’. (Parma 17 177-78)
Together, these passages from the “Athrabeth” and Parma make it clear
that the “addition” of the Children and their purpose to “complete the
Design” were Eru-Ilúvatar’s extended, drawn-out work in progress intended to correct the harm done to the world by Melkor. They support
the initial and unchanged statement in “Ainulindalë” already discussed,
and help to clarify the “task” appointed to Men by Ilúvatar in the aftermath of Creation. I suggest that the purpose of the Children—that
is, both Elves and Men—to complete the design must be twofold in its
action, for otherwise there would be no necessity for two separate races.
Unless the interaction of the two was formative, the power given to Men
to “shape their lives” would affect them alone without any wider consequences for the world. Nor would there be wider consequences unless
there was some pre-existing circumstance on which that power could
work, the pre-determination of events that is the Music. The energy in
the contact of Men with Elves is the engine for change. The free will of
Men acting on and against the fate of Elves will bring about the desired
re-vision of the Music. It is worth noting that nothing is said in these
passages about free will or free virtue, but a further comment in the same
section that “the minds of the Children were not open to the Valar (except by the free will of the Children” (Parma 17, 178) must be considered.
“Children” is clearly here an inclusive noun encompassing both Elves
and Men, and I take the operation of free will in this instance to be
along the lines of Fëanor’s in saying yea or nay to Yavanna— an internal
process not affecting events but deeply influencing the inner nature of
individuals involved in those events.
Finally, and this will loop back to my opening discussion:, several
points should be re-iterated.
(1) Tolkien was writing fiction, not theology. He was not arguing
for the validity of either fate or free will.
(2) The entire concept should be seen as an imaginary sub-creation in which the contending forces of fate and free will conjoin to form a “green sun,” an element or aspect deliberately
contrary to the Primary world but essential and formative in
the Secondary one
(3) The mythology in its entirety is meant to be read in the context176
Verlyn Flieger
of Tolkien’s narrative strategy of using a multiplicity of storytellers and points of view rather than a single omniscient narrative voice. Among these fictive storytellers are the Elvish sage
Rúmil, the mortal voyager Eriol/Ælfwine, the Elvish minstrel
Daeron, the mortal woman Andreth, and the mortal hobbits
Bilbo and Frodo Baggins and Sam Gamgee, all of whom are
allowed to tell it as they see it. No one, it seems, was intended
to have the final word. Except Ilúvatar, who tells Melkor, “no
theme may be played that hath not its uttermost source in me,
nor can any alter the music in my despite” (S 17), and leaves it
at that.
By establishing and following his own rules Tolkien has succeeded in giving his invented world the “inner consistency of reality” he insisted was
essential. The intersection of fate and free will replicates the real world,
where these concepts are also inextricably intertwined and interdependent. Fate assumes the absence (therefore the conceptual presence) of
choice, while the freedom of free will must rely on its opposite as that
from which to be free. As there is no concept of up without its opposite
down, or of inside without an outside, so with fate and free will each
depends on the other for its meaning. It is well to remember, moreover,
that fate and free will, for all humanity’s engagement with them as ideas,
are neither facts nor principles. They are not easily demonstrable, like
gravity, nor clinically testable, like a controlled experiment. Rather, they
are human interpretations imposed upon phenomena that may or may
not have them in actuality.
Excluding the exceptional circumstances of prophecy or second sight,
a pattern seen as fate is nearly always recognized in retrospect, organized
with hindsight out of a selection of salient circumstances that appear to
relate most directly to one another and thus to make a coherent design.
Free will is fate’s opposite but also its corollary and partner, dependent
on the appearance of choice in major areas of life. Few would bother to
invoke free will in the performance of the small tasks of daily life, bathing and dressing, eating and drinking. The concept of free will comes
into play when the importance of choice is significant, when humanity’s
“virtue” to influence events for good or ill is seen as an essential part of
human activity in the world.
What emerges in Tolkien’s depiction of Eä, the “World that Is,” is
a picture of the confusing state of affairs in the world that really “is,” a
state of affairs as it appears to us humans, an uncertain, unreliable, untidy, constantly swinging balance between fate and human effort, between
the Music and the Task. Unlike philosophers past and present, Tolkien
was not attempting to solve the puzzle, nor was he intending to show that
177
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
one or the other principle governed the world and those within it. He
was trying to show the world the way he saw it—as a place of hope and
despair, cruelty and compassion. He saw it as a place where accidents
happen, where plans go awry, where young men die in war and children
lose their parents, where the right side can lose, where love is not always
enough. But he also saw it as a place where human beings of good will
and good intentions grope often blindly toward a more hopeful future
that remains out of sight but not out of mind. His invented world deliberately included provisions for both fate and free will in order to reflect
the often inevitable, sometimes unexpected, frequently incomprehensible
unfolding of events as they happen in and shape humanity’s perceptions
of the real world. The whole elaborate enterprise was, as described in the
quote from John Garth which forms my epigraph, “nothing less than an
attempt to justify God’s creation of an imperfect world filled with suffering, loss, and grief ” (Garth 255).
The struggles undergone by the characters who inhabit Tolkien’s fictive world require both order and spontaneity to justify them, to give
them meaning, and above all to create that uncertainty of outcome which
is a hallmark of effective fiction. The story needs its readers’ awareness
of both the Music and the task. Thus, we as readers must recognize that
the original great theme, proposed by Ilúvatar and spoiled in the making by Melkor, is embedded first in the ensuing Music and then in the
world created through that Music. We must see that this spoiled Music
goes uncorrected by the godhead, who instead assigns that task to one
race of his created beings. We must honor the decision (not really Eru’s
but Tolkien’s) to introduce into this unhappy, unfinished world the two
unanticipated races of Elves and Men; and the further decision to give
one race, Men, the freedom to change their lives and through those lives
to change the Music and thus the fate of Middle-earth and its inhabitants. Only then can we understand the paradox with which I introduced
this discussion as Tolkien’s ultimately hopeful vision for what he saw as a
fallen world: that in a flawed and faulty Creation it is the task appointed
for flawed and faulty human beings—struggling with the world around
them, sometimes making false starts, often following twisting paths of
which they themselves cannot always see the ends—to lead themselves
and that world out of error and into light.
Notes
1 This is not to say that all readers have overlooked it. See the very
thorough entry for “Free Will and Fate” in Scull and Hammond’s
Reader’s Guide, vol. 2 of The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion and Guide (324-
333). See also my own exploration in Splintered Light: Logos and Language
in Tolkien’s World (52-53).178
Verlyn Flieger
1 It should be emphasized that the ensuing discussion is entirely literary, not theological or philosophical. I am not (nor was Tolkien),
arguing the actuality or the validity of either fate or free will, merely
their fictive representation as aspects of his invented world. Conceptually, of course, and semantically, each apparently independent element requires the other as its opposite corollary, as up needs down, or
dark needs light for full comprehension. Free implies that from which
to be free, a constraint removed or denied; while Fate, cf. the OED’s
first definition as the unalterable predetermination of events, implies
restraint of what would otherwise be free.
2 My knowledge of modern fantasy, I hasten to add, is not encyclopedic. I welcome correction by those more familiar with the subject.
3 Such readings include Boethian, as both Shaun Hughes and Kathleen Dubs proclaim (Hughes review of Tolkien and Modernity in Tolkien
Studies V (25); Dubs “Providence, Fate, and Chance: Boethian Philosophy in The Lord of the Rings” in Tolkien and the Invention of Myth);
Boethian and/or Manichean, both of which are considered but rejected by Tom Shippey in his Road to Middle-earth (128-9); Augustinian
as John Houghton maintains in his article “Augustine of Hippo” in
J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia.
4 Wyrd is one of several words used in the poem to denote an all-powerful supernatural force, others being Metod, “measure,” Dryhten, “lord
or The Lord” (often translated as “God”) and God with specific reference to the Judaeo-Christian deity. The intended meanings and appropriate translations have been and still are the focus of the ongoing
debate over the amount of Christianity in the poem. My purpose
here is not to enter that debate, merely to note the worldview conveyed by wyrd in its original meaning.
5 The initials stood for “Tea Club Barrovian Society,” after Barrows
Store in downtown Birmingham, the meeting place of the four when
they were students together at King Edward’s School.
6 The phrase “what we three certainly meant” was an allusion to the
“Council of London,” a meeting among Tolkien, Smith, Gilson and
Wiseman in December of 1914 that in some fashion crystallized the
hopes and artistic ambitions of the four before they went off to war.
7 Although more than two decades separate Smith’s words from Frodo’s, that hobbit’s outcry to Gandalf at Bag End, “Why was I chosen?” seems in context a direct response.
8 Though it should be noted that several critics have seen a connection179
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
between Tolkien’s war experience and his fiction, among them Brian
Rosebury, who links Tolkien to the “lost generation” of World War
I writers, (Rosebury 133-52), and Tom Shippey, who characterizes
him as a “post-war writer” in the tradition of George Orwell, William Golding, and T.H. White (Road 288). John Garth’s Tolkien and the
Great War sheds new biographical light on the connection, and Janet
Brennan Croft’s War and the Works of J.R.R. Tolkien gives valuable insights into Tolkien’s treatment of war in The Hobbit and The Lord of the
Rings.
9 Careful reading of “Ainulindalë” shows that the Valar, who are outside—indeed are creators of—the Music, are for that reason independent of it. Indeed, Ilúvatar makes clear their autonomy when he
invites them to adorn the Music “each with his own thoughts and
devices, if he will” [my emphasis].
10 A note in Tolkien’s unpublished linguistic papers is apposite here.
He wrote that, “[t]he author is not in the tale in one sense, yet it all
proceeds from him (and what was in him), so that he is present all
the time. Now while composing the tale he may have certain general
designs (the plot for instance), and he may have a clear conception
of the character (independent of the particular tale) of each feigned
actor. But those are the limits of his ‘foreknowledge’. Many authors
have recorded the feeling that one of their actors ‘comes alive’ as it
were, and does things that were not foreseen at all at the outset and
may modify in a small or even large way the process of the tale thereafter. All such unforeseen actions or events are, however, taken up to
become integral parts of the tale when finally concluded. Now when
that has been done, then the author’s ‘foreknowledge’ is complete,
and nothing can happen, be said, or done, that he does not know of
and will/or allow to be. Even so, some of the Eldarin philosophers
ventured to say, it was with Eru.”
11 Turambar and the Foalókë,” The Book of Lost Tales earliest version of
The Children of Hurin, Tolkien applies the word weird explicitly to
Túrin: “. . . soon too had he met his death—and his weird had been
the happier thereby” (Lost Tales II, 85).
12 It is worth noting in this context that what Tolkien called the “three
Great Tales” of his legendarium, the story of Beren and Lúthien,
The Fall of Gondolin, and The Children of Húrin all involve the intrusion of a free-willed Man into a fated Elvish stronghold with direct
effect on the lives of the elves therein, as well as on the outcome of
the story.180
Verlyn Flieger
13 Considerations of space preclude examination of the greatest exemplar of the intricate interconnections of fate and free will, Túrin son
of Húrin, whose chosen epithet, Turambar embodies the Quenya
morpheme mbar (fate), and whose free choices bring disaster on himself and those around him, both Men and Elves.
14 The fairy tale model for the whole episode is the story of “Culhwch
and Olwen” in the Welsh Mabinogion. The story is an exemplar of the
tale-type called by folklorists The Giant’s Daughter. Its plot hinges
on the efforts of a supernatural parent whose death, it is foretold (i.e.
fated), will occur when his daughter marries, to forestall the marriage
by setting the suitor an impossible and deliberately lethal task. When
the suitor, with the aid of magic, accomplishes the task, the parent is
accordingly killed. Variants on this type can be found in the Finnish
Kalevala’s wooing stories of two of that mythology’s heroes, Ilmarinen
and Lemminkainen. Ilmarinen succeeds. Lemminkainen does not.
WORKS CITED
Beowulf: A Dual-Language Edition, trans. Howell Chickering. New York:
Doubleday, 1977.
Branston, Brian. The Lost Gods of England, New York: Oxford University
Press, 1974.
Dubs, Kathleen. “Fortune and Fate.” In J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia, ed.
Michael D.C. Drout. New York: Routledge, 2007.
–––. “Providence, Fate, and Chance: Boethian Philosophy in The Lord of
the Rings.” In Tolkien and the Invention of Myth, ed. Jane Chance.
Lexington, KY: The University Press of Kentucky, 2004.
Fisher, Jason. “‘Man does as he is when he may do as he wishes’: The Perennial Modernity of Free Will.” In Tolkien and Modernity vol. 1,
ed. Frank Weinreich and Thomas Honegger. Zollikofen: Walking Tree Publishers, 2006.
Flieger, Verlyn. Splintered Light: Logos and Language in Tolkien’s World, Revised
Edition. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press, 2002.
Fornet-Ponse, Thomas. “Freedom and Providence as Anti-Modern Elements.” In Tolkien and Modernity, vol. 1, ed. Frank Weinreich and
Thomas Honegger. Zollikofen: Walking Tree Publishers, 2006.
Garth, John. Tolkien and the Great War. London: HarperCollins, 2003.
Houghton, John. “Augustine of Hippo,” In J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia, ed.181
The Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth
Michael D.C. Drout. New York: Routledge, 2007.
Hughes, Shaun. Review of Tolkien and Modernity in Tolkien Studies, vol. IV.
Morgantown: West Virginia University Press, 2008.
The Poetic Edda, trans. Bellows. New York: Biblo and Tannen, 1969.
Rosebury, Brian. Tolkien: A Critical Assessment. New York: St. Martin’s
Press, 1992.
Scull, Christina and Wayne Hammond. The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion
and Guide, vol. I Chronology. London: HarperCollins Publishers,
2007.
Shippey, Tom. The Road to Middle-earth. 2nd edition. London: HarperCollins Grafton, 1992.
Snorri Sturluson. Edda trans. Anthony Faulkes. London: J.M. Dent & Co.
Everyman, 1987.
Timmons, Daniel. “Free Will” in J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia: Scholarship and
Critical Assessment. Ed. Michael D.C. Drout. New York: Routledge, 2007.
Weinreich, Frank. “Brief Considerations on Determinism in Reality and
Fiction.” In Tolkien and Modernity, vol. 1. Zollikofen: Walking
Tree Publishers, 2006.183
Tolkien’s texts copyright ©2009 The Tolkien Trust
NOTES AND DOCUMENTS
Fate and Free Will
J.R.R. TOLKIEN
Edited by Carl F. Hostetter
Sometime after January 1968, Tolkien turned again to considerations of two
Quenya words encountered and glossed in The Lord of the Rings, ambar ‘world’
and umbar ‘fate,’ and of their precise meanings and etymological and semantic
relationship.1 Amidst a linguistic discussion of certain points of Elvish phonology,
Tolkien cited the Eldarin base MBAR underlying both these Quenya words, as
well as the related Sindarin forms amar ‘world’ and amarth ‘fate’ :
MBAR: basically “settle, establish” but with a considerable semantic development, being especially applied to ‘settlement’, sc. the settling of a
place, occupation (permanently) and ordering of a region as a ‘home’ (of
a family or people) > to erect (permanent) buildings, dwellings? 2
Tolkien goes on to cite various derivatives of this base, including:
Q[uenya] and T[elerin] ambar, S[indarin] amar ‘world,’ ‘the great habitation.’
Beneath these glosses he added a note of clarification:
The full implications of this word cannot be understood without reference to Eldarin views and ideas concerning ‘fate’ and ‘free will.’ (See note
on these points.) The sense ‘world’—applied usually to this Earth—is
mainly derived from sense ‘settlement’: ‘the great habitation’ ()
as ‘home of speaking creatures’ esp. Elves and Men. (ambar ‘world’ differed from Arda in reference. Arda meant ‘realm’ & was this earth as the
realm ruled by Manwe (the Elder King) vice-regent of Eru, for benefit of
the Children of Eru.) But though mbar- was naturally mostly used of the
activities and purposes of rational creatures, it was not limited to these.
It thus could refer to the conditions and established (physical) processes
of the Earth (as established at its Creation directly or mediately by Eru),
which was part of Eä, the Universe. And so approached in some uses the
sense ‘Fate’, according to Eldarin thought on the subject. Thus Q. ambarmenie “the way of the world” (“world” by the way never meant “people”),
the fixed, and by ‘creatures’ unalterable, conditions in which they lived.
Then, a little further on in this discussion of derivatives of MBAR, Tolkien
cites:184
J.R.R. Tolkien
S[indarin] amarth, ‘Fate.’ This sense is an application of the basic sense,
augmented by its formation, of mbar: ‘permanent establishment/order’;
‘Fate’ especially (when applied to the future): sc. the order and conditions
of the physical world (or of Eä in general) as far as established and preordained at Creation, and that part of this ordained order which affected
an individual with a will, as being immutable by his personal will.
The “note on these points” that Tolkien refers to here in connection with fate
and free will arose in an earlier version of this same discussion of certain strictly
linguistic points, beginning on a sheet which Tolkien subsequently titled “Fate”
(after bracketing the discussion of MBAR and striking out the more strictly linguistic discussion that preceded it), and continuing on for four more pages, the
first of which Tolkien titled “Fate and Free Will.” Part of the note exists in two
versions, sc. those paragraphs numbered here as §4 through §6. I give here the
reading of the second version, which for the most part follows the first version
very closely, but interpolate into the body of the text one significant paragraph
(here numbered §7 and set in brackets) of the first version that is lacking in the
second version.
As is typical of Tolkien, he begins in a careful hand, but soon lapses into an
increasingly hasty scrawl, with the result that some words, and particularly the
final paragraphs, are very difficult to interpret. I give all uncertain readings in
square brackets with a query mark. I have editorially omitted a few brief technical passages of strictly phonological discussion (indicated by ellipses), silently
incorporated all insertions, provided some necessary punctuation, altered some
of Tolkien’s square brackets (of no apparent special significance) to parentheses,
expanded some abbreviations, repositioned some notes to stand nearer to their
antecedent text, and numbered each paragraph. All other editorial alterations
and indications are set in square brackets.
§1. MBAR ‘settle, establish’ (hence also, settle a place, settle in a place,
establish one’s home) also to erect (permanent buildings, dwellings, etc.);
extended form ṃbarat- with greater intensity . . . > Common Eldarin
ṃ
bar’tă ‘permanent establishment’ > fate of the world in general as, or as
far as, established and pre-ordained from creation; and that part of this
‘fate’ which affected an individual person, and not open to modification
by his free will.*
§2. *E.g. one of the Eldar would have said that for all Elves and Men
the shape, condition, and therefore the past and future physical development and destiny of this ‘earth’ was determined and beyond their
power to change, indeed beyond the power even of the Valar to alter
in any large and permanent way. ([Marginal note:] They distinguished
between “change” and redirection. Thus any ‘rational [?will-user]’
could in a small way move, re-direct, stop, or destroy objects in the185
Fate and Free Will
world; but he could not “change” into something else.3 They did not confuse analysis with change, e.g. water / steam, oxygen hydrogen.) The
Downfall of Númenor was ‘a miracle’ as we might say, or as they a
direct action of Eru within time that altered the previous scheme for all
remaining time. They would probably also have said that Bilbo was
‘fated’ to find the Ring, but not necessarily to surrender it; and then if
Bilbo surrendered it Frodo was fated to go on his mission, but not necessarily to destroy the Ring—which in fact he did not do. They would
have added that if the downfall of Sauron and the destruction of the
Ring was part of Fate (or Eru’s Plan) then if Bilbo had retained the
Ring and refused to surrender it, some other means would have arisen
by which Sauron was frustrated. Just as when Frodo’s will proved in
the end inadequate, a means for the Ring’s destruction immediately
appeared—being kept in reserve by Eru as it were.
§3. In Q. ṃbar’tă > umbart > umbar (genitive umbarto) ‘Fate’. . . in S. amarth.
. . . The word from the simple stem mbar- . . . was ambara ‘establishment’,
Q. ambar ‘the world’, T. ambar, S. *amar (not found). This was to [the]
Eldar more obviously related to ṃbar’ta than we might feel it to be, since
‘fate’ so far [as] they recognized it was conceived as a much more physical obstacle to will.
§4. They would not have denied that (say) a man was (may have been)
“fated” to meet an enemy of his at a certain time and place, but they
would have denied that he was “fated” then to speak to him in terms of
hatred, or to slay him. “Will” at a certain grade must enter into many of
the complex motions leading to a meeting of persons; but the Eldar held
that only those efforts of “will” were “free” which were directed to a fully
aware purpose. On a journey a man may turn aside, choosing this or that
way—e.g. to avoid a marsh, or a steep hill—but this decision is mostly
intuitive or half-conscious (as that of an irrational animal) and has only
an immediate object of easing his journey. His setting-out may have been
a free decision, to achieve some object,* but his actual course was largely
under physical direction—and it might have led to/or missed a meeting of
importance. It was this aspect of “chance” that was included in umbar.
See L.R. III p. 360: “a chance-meeting as we say in Middle-earth.” That
was said by Gandalf of his meeting with Thorin in Bree, which led to
the visit to Bilbo. For this “chance,” not purposed or even thought of by
either Thorin or Gandalf, made contact with Gandalf ’s “will,” and his
fixed purpose and designs for the protection of the NW frontiers against
the power of Sauron. If Gandalf had been different in character, or if
he had not seized the opportunity, the “chance” would, as it were, have
failed to “go off ” (misfired). Gandalf was not “fated” to act as he did186
J.R.R. Tolkien
then. (Indeed his actions were most odd, idiosyncratic, and unexpectable:
Gandalf was a powerful “free will” let loose, as it were, among the physical “chances” of the world).4
§5. *Thus if a man set out on a journey with the purpose of finding his
enemy, and the purpose then of doing this or that (pardoning him /
asking his pardon / cursing him / seeking to slay him): That purpose
governs the whole process. It may be frustrated by “chance” (—in fact
he never met him—) or it may be helped by chance (—in fact against
likelihood he did meet him), but in the latter case if he did evil he
could not [?throw] the blame on “chance”.
§6. Umbar thus relates to the net-work of “chances” (largely physical)
which is, or is not, used by rational persons with ‘free will.’ That aspect of
things which we might include in Fate—the ‘determination’ that we each
carry about with us in our given created character (which later acts and
experience may modify but not fundamentally change) was not included
in Umbar by the Eldar; who said that if it was in any way similar it was on
a different ‘plane.’ But the ultimate problem of Free Will in its relation
to the Foreknowledge of a Designer (both of the plane of Umbar and of the
Mind and the blending of both in Incarnate Mind), Eru, “the Author of
the Great Tale,” was of course not resolved by the Eldar.
[§7. But they would have said it is the continual clash of umbar, the
‘chances’ of ambar as a fixed arrangement which continues to work out
inevitably (except only for ‘miracle’ a direct or mediate intervention of
Eru, from outside umbar and ambar), and purposeful will that [?ramifies]
a story [or] tale (as an excerpt from the total drama of which Eru is
the Author or as that Drama itself). Until the appearance of Will all is
mere preparation, interesting only on a quite different & lower plane:
like mathematics or observing the physical [?events] of the world or in a
small way the workings of a machine. Will first appeared with the Ainur/
Valar, but except for Melkor and those he dominated their wills being in accord with Eru effected little change in Ambar or deflected Umbar.]5
§8. They said that, though this likeness is only a ‘likeness,’ not an equation, the nearest experience of the Incarnates to this problem is to be
found in the author of a tale. The author is not in the tale in one sense,
yet it all proceeds from him (and what was in him), so that he is present
all the time.* Now while composing the tale he may have certain general
designs (the plot for instance), and he may have a clear conception of the
character (independent of the particular tale) of each feigned actor. But
those are the limits of his ‘foreknowledge.’ Many authors have recorded187
Fate and Free Will
the feeling that one of their actors ‘comes alive’ as it were, and does
things that were not foreseen at all at the outset and may modify in a
small or even large way the process of the tale thereafter. All such unforeseen actions or events are, however, taken up to become integral parts of
the tale when finally concluded. Now when that has been done, then the
author’s ‘foreknowledge’ is complete, and nothing can happen, be said,
or done, that he does not know of and will/or allow to be. Even so, some
of the Eldarin philosophers ventured to say, it was with Eru.
§9. *If one ‘character’ in the tale is the author then he becomes as it
were only a lesser and partial picture of the author in imagined circumstances.
The note originally ended here, about a third of the way down the page; but at
a later point (judging by the change of writing implement), Tolkien added one
more very rough and faint paragraph (readings marked here as uncertain are
for the most part very uncertain indeed), apparently applying the simile of “the
author of a tale” to his cosmogonic myth:
§10. [? ?] Music of Ainur ancient legend from Valinorean days. Firs[t]
stage the music or ‘concert’ of voices and instruments—Eru takes up
alterations by [?the] created wills (‘good’ or bad) and adds of His own.
Second stage the theme now [?transformed is provided with] a Tale and
presented as visible drama to the Ainur [?bounded but great.] Eru had
not [?complete] foreknowledge, but [?after it His] foreknowledge was
[?complete] to the smallest detail—but [?He] did not reveal it all. He
veiled the latter part from the eyes of the Valar who were to be actors.
NOTES
I am grateful to Christopher Tolkien for providing me with a photocopy of these texts and for his assistance in reading the more nearly
illegible portions; and further to the Tolkien Estate for their kind
grant of permission to publish these texts here.
1 These notes date to no earlier than 1968, since they were written
on discarded Allen & Unwin publishing notices dated January 1968.
Tolkien had already written extensively on the same topic in notes
dating to the mid-1960s: see Tolkien’s “Words, Phrases & Passages in
The Lord of the Rings,” published in Parma Eldalamberon XVII (in particular 104–10, 123–4, and 163–4). These earlier notes likewise range
beyond strictly linguistic discussion into the nature and relations of
fate and the created world, and as such have direct bearing on the
discussion presented here and should be consulted by the reader.188
J.R.R. Tolkien
2 The query mark is Tolkien’s own. The symbol “>” is commonly used
in linguistics to mean “yielded”, either in form (by phonological development) or meaning (by semantic variation). Here the meaning is
that from the basic sense ‘settle, establish’ arose the sense “to erect
permanent buildings or dwellings.”
3 In keeping with the sense of the rest of this marginal note, Tolkien’s
intent here may have been to write “he could not change them into
something else,” referring to the preceding objects, which can be altered
in form or state (as water to steam) or even analyzed into constituent
elements (oxygen and hydrogen), but cannot be changed into another
thing entirely.
4 Cf. also Gandalf ’s statement, “I did no more than follow the lead of
‘chance’” in “The Quest of Erebor” (Unfinished Tales 322).
5 This paragraph, interpolated from the first version of the note, continues with a partial sentence: “Ambar is complex enough, but only
Eru who made and designed both Ambar (the processes of Eä).”
Tolkien interrupted the sentence at this point to provide an etymological note on Eä, which reads: “Ea ‘it is’ only = the total of Ambar: the given material and its processes of change. Outside Ea is the
world/sphere of aware purpose and will.” This was followed at the
bottom of the page by an etymological note on the Quenya word for
‘will’ :
?DEL: Q. lēle, v[erb] lelya (lelinye). To will with conscious
purpose, immediate or remote. To be willing, to assent,
consent, agree—quite different, for it partakes of will but
is an additional [?accident]. A man may say ‘I [?wish],
I agree, I will’ to some proposition of another without
special purpose of his own (but he may also have reflected
that it fits in with some design of his own and so agree to
it as he might not otherwise have done).
The top of the next page begins the second version of the text.
WORKS CITED
Tolkien, J.R.R., Words, Phrases & Passages in “The Lord of the Rings” ed.
Christopher Gilson. Mountain View, CA: Parma Eldelamberon, 2007. Parma Eldalamberon no. 17.189
Copyright © West Virginia University Press
Tolkien’s texts copyright ©2009 The Tolkien Trust
J.R.R. Tolkien and The Wanderer: From Edition to
Application
STUART D. LEE
Towards the end of his Valedictory Address, presented on the 5th June 1959, Professor Tolkien chose, by way of conclusion, to read
the famous ubi sunt lines from the Old English poem The Wanderer:
If then with understanding I contemplate this venerable
foundation, I now myself frōd in ferðe am moved to exclaim:
Hwǽr cwóm mearh, hwær cwóm mago? Hwǽr cwóm máþþumgyfa?
Hwǽr cwóm symbla gesetu? Hwǽr sindon seledréamas?
Éalá, beorht bune! Éalá, byrnwiga!
Éalá, þéodnes þrym! Hú seo þrág gewát,
genáp under niht-helm, swá heo nó wǽre!
Where is the horse gone, where the young rider? Where now
the giver of gifts? Where are the seats at the feasting gone?
Where are the merry sounds in the hall? Alas, the bright goblet! Alas, the knight and his hauberk! Alas, the glory of the
king! How that hour has departed, dark under the shadow of
night, as had it never been! (MC, 239)
Douglas Gray, who was present at the lecture recalls:
. . . there was a stillness in the room as if the Green Knight
himself had come in. He really understood, as few medievalists do, the importance of “performance” for medieval
literature. (21)
Over thirty years before his final lecture, Tolkien remarked that these
lines were:
Deservedly famous.1 One of the best expressions of this motive in literature . . . we do not gain much from the argument
of scholars as to whether it is a native or a learned motive.
We might say it is a human motive! . . . And the question
“where are” of the departed has been asked (as one might
expect) in many languages. (A 38, f. 36v)2
For many reasons the choice of these lines was fitting. They focus on
transience, and no doubt Professor Tolkien himself saw this as a moment190
Stuart D. Lee
of passing. More importantly, as we shall see by consulting Tolkien’s work
(predominantly his unpublished material), he engaged with this poem on
a regular basis; and, by exploring these interactions, we can draw some
interesting conclusions about Tolkien and his scholarship.
Before proceeding with the analysis of Tolkien’s interaction with the
poem, it is worth reminding ourselves of the original text. The Wanderer
is an Old English poem. It survives in a single copy in The Exeter Book (ff.
76v-78r), and is usually described as an elegy (and thus part of a series
of Old English elegies, including such poems as The Ruin, The Seafarer,
etc.). It is a powerful poem detailing an individual’s exile from society, his
lonely wanderings, and at the same time it touches on themes of general
loss.
The structure of the poem is fairly straightforward in one way, in that
it has an opening and closing (almost like a prologue and epilogue), and
in between is a lengthy speech by a single protagonist (but, as we will see
later, the number of people speaking in the poem is not without debate).
It begins with an image of a lonely individual suffering hardship (ll. 1-4).
This, it is generally assumed, is the wanderer of the title, who we discover
to be an outcast, pacing the earth without the solace of friends, relations,
or lords (ll. 8-10)—a near death-sentence in the early Middle Ages. The
poet then proceeds to explore a range of ideas and topics familiar to
other Old English poems opening up from a single incident (the exiled
wanderer of the poem’s title) to wider issues concerning the nature of
suffering, and the transitory nature of existence.
As it stands it is a Christian poem. Yet, on the face of it is not concerned with any great theological debate, but instead concentrates on
the plight and personal loss of a single human being, who dreams of
the past and contrasts it with the harsh present. In his mind he can summon up images of bygone joys and friends, but he cannot capture them
forever. On wakening they simply disappear and “swim away” (ll. 41-8).
He extrapolates from his own loneliness the observation that all worldly
glory and comforts seem transitory. Although one is tempted to cry in
despair at the loss of the horse, the warrior, and the hall (ll. 92-96—the
passage quoted earlier), the wanderer reminds us that everything must
pass. Thus a person should not bemoan his loss and instead must hold
resolute—seen as a virtue. For suffering, the wanderer concludes, can in
itself lead to wisdom (ll. 64-5). The poet appeals, therefore, to all lonely
voyagers and wanderers in exile—which to a Christian is everyone, i.e.
we are all exiled from Eden and temporarily from Heaven.
It is a tale, therefore, of personal loss, but to many readers it also offers consolation. It begins and ends with mention of ar or “mercy.” Thus,
although we open with the harshness of the present, by the end we are
guided to look to the brighter future of salvation.191
J.R.R. Tolkien and The Wanderer
Bearing this briefest of synopses in mind, let us now consider Tolkien’s
interactions with the text. From the outset, however, it should be noted
that Tolkien never published a final edition of The Wanderer (though there
is evidence to suggest that he had every intention of doing so),3 or for
that matter, wrote any articles solely directed at an analysis of the poem.4
Nevertheless, contained in his unpublished notes are a series of studies
directly or indirectly analyzing the text. Table 1 presents a complete list
of the manuscripts containing his notes on The Wanderer and this will be
used throughout this article.
The earliest datable mention of the poem appears in material supporting his lectures for Oxford’s English Faculty in Hilary Term 1927.5
This was just under two years after he had arrived back at Oxford from
his Readership at Leeds University, and for that term Tolkien was listed
as teaching:
Exodus
Gothic (class)
Old Icelandic: Völsunga Saga
Old English Philology (Morphology and Vocabulary)
The Verse of Sweet’s Anglo-Saxon Reader
King Horn (Textual and Dialectal Comparison of the MSS)
Discussion Class6
Supplementing his lecture on “The Verse of Sweet’s Anglo-Saxon
Reader”7 we find in his notes a translation of The Wanderer (A30 C, ff. 13-
15), some introductory remarks on the poem (A30 E, ff. 22-25), and a
more detailed textual analysis (A30 F, ff. 26-39). The evidence presented
by the lecture list indicates that these notes by Tolkien all date from the
period 1926-27.
From around the same time we also have another collection of notes
(A38 A, ff. 1-8, and A 38 B, ff. 9-12). Included therein is a reading list
that includes texts by Nora Kershaw and W. J. Sedgefield (both from
1922) and a reference to W. P. Ker’s English Literature: Medieval (originally
published in 1912 but reissued in 1925). A38 B, ff. 9-12, are more problematic to date, and we shall return to this collection later on.
At this point there is a gap of a few years, but it is possible that material from this period are now lost. As noted earlier, Douglas A. Anderson
(19) states that after the launch of the Methuen Old English Library in
1932, Tolkien and E. V. Gordon signed up to be the senior partners on
the editions of The Wanderer and The Seafarer, respectively. Anderson states
that, “these editions were essentially complete by the mid-1930s.” The
assumption is that Tolkien sent his notes and drafts to Gordon for final
revision, but if he did so, the papers no longer survive.
Next we have a series of drafts and redrafts of a talk entitled a “short192
Stuart D. Lee
Shelfmark Possible date Comments
A38 (D), ff. 16-21 Hilary Term, 1927
Hilary term lecture list for
1927, but notes not directly
related to TW.
A38 (C), ff. 13-15
1926-7
Preparatory notes and lecture
for 1927 lecture. E = lecture,
F = word by word notes of
TW, C = translation of TW.
A 38 (E), ff. 22-25 1926-7 “
A 38 (F), ff. 26-39 1926-7 “
A 38 (A), ff. 1-8 1927?
Typed up version of A38 (E),
ff. 22-25. Clearly later as in
A38 (E) f22v there is a pencil
insertion of: “presented to
the Cathedral by Leofric—
Bishop of Ex. 1050-1072.”
This appears in the typescript
of A38 (A), as “in the library
of Exeter Cathedral, to
which it was presented by
Leofric, Bishop of Exeter
1050-1072.” A38 (E) also
has handwritten reading list
that corresponds to A38 (A)’s
opening.
A 38 B ff.9-12 1930s/1940s? Eight sides with three further
general statements about TW.
A30/1 (A1), ff. 1-5 1937 completed by January
14th 1938 Radio talk
A30/1 (A2), ff. 6-13 “ “
A30/1 (A3), ff. 14-22 “ “
A30/1 (A4), ff. 23-40 “ “
A30/1 (A5), ff. 41-68 1942
Adaptation of radio talk.
Renamed “The Beginnings
of English Poetry.”
A30/1 (A6), ff. 69-82 1943-1948 “
Valedictory Address 5th June 1959
A30/1, ff. 107-168 1964-65
Response to Burton Raffel’s
translations. F.106 has sheet
from The Daily Telegraph and
Morning Post, dated Saturday,
September 21, 1963.
Table1. Tolkien’s notes on The Wanderer (TW) in chronological order193
J.R.R. Tolkien and The Wanderer
Lecture on Old English Verse” or occasionally just “Anglo-Saxon Verse”
(A 30/1, ff. 1-82). This was the nucleus of a 15-minute broadcast given
by Tolkien in 1938 for the BBC’s National Programme, which formed
part of the series entitled Poetry Will Out: Studies in National Inspiration and
Characteristic Forms. It was broadcast on the 14th January in the late evening from 10.45-11.00 pm. Christopher Tolkien, when attempting to derive the chronology of these pieces in 1985, provided a lengthy note on
a flyslip to the collection:
There are many different interconnected versions of which I
have not precisely determined the relations.
Those labelled A1, A2, A3 seems [sic.] certainly to have been
produced in that order, though emendations were incorporated in A3.
A4 has a different beginning (the Battle of Brunanburgh),
but the reference to “1000 years ago last autumn” shows it
to belong to the same time. A2 has the headnote “submitted
as script for talk Jan. 14 1938,” A3 the headnote “revised
and timed,” and A4 “revised according to your suggestions”
8 (whose?) together with notes in another hand referring to
the delivery of the talk on BBC radio.
A5 and A6, also beginning with the Battle of Brunanburgh,
are later and differently conceived. On the third page of A5
is reference to “1942,” while the ref. on p.1 of A6 to “1006
this summer” shows it was written in 1943.9
We now know the answer to some of these questions. For example, the
mysterious person addressed in A4 who probably offered Tolkien suggestions on the broadcast was C. V. Salmon (see Scull and Hammond’s
Chronology 206ff.). However, piecing together the exact timeline of these
drafts takes much more effort, as Christopher Tolkien realized.
The collection of material contained in A 30/1, ff. 1-82, is illustrative
of two issues one has to face when dealing with Tolkien’s manuscripts.
First, as is widely known, he was a great rewriter and adapter of his own
work and this talk alone has four separate drafts preparing for the 1938
radio broadcast (across ff. 1-40). Second, the exact dating of a manuscript
is not always easy. For example, although we know the date of the radio
talk (14th January 1938) it is evident that Tolkien used the short talk at a
later stage for a much longer presentation, expanding it to produce the
set of notes found in ff. 41-68, and ff. 69-82, at two separate moments in
time. Evidence within the text of the talk, as we shall see, clearly suggests
that these range from 1942 to 1948. A precise chronology is difficult, but194
Stuart D. Lee
clues emerge within the body of the text and also in occasional marginalia. For example, in the various versions there is the running reference
to the Battle of Brunanburgh as noted by Christopher Tolkien (which
occurred in the year 937). In the scripts for the BBC broadcast (A 30/1,
ff. 1-40), completed over the Christmas of 1937 and New Year of 1938,
Tolkien refers to the battle as being “1000 years ago last autumn.” However, in the later notes (A 30/1, ff. 41-68), this was changed to “1003”
(years ago) and “1005” with an interlinear note of “1942” (f. 42). In the
final version (A30/1, ff. 69-82) Tolkien recorded “1000 years ago—1006
this summer \autumn/ to be precise” (f. 69), subsequently changing
“1006” to “1008,” then to “1012,” and eventually settling on “1011 last.”
In addition, on f. 69v he writes “1943” and then “1945.”
Christina Scull and Wayne Hammond (Chronology 257) suggest that at
some point in 1943 Tolkien revised “a talk on Old English Verse, probably to give at the Oxford High School for Girls.” However, as we can
see from the above, evidence indicates that he began to rewrite this the
year before, in 1942 (i.e. f. 42). The reference to “tonight” on A 30/1 f.57
(by this time the talk had become “The Beginnings of English Poetry”)
is quite probably the evening talk of 1943 for the School as identified by
Scull and Hammond. However, evidently from the note on f. 69v, he was
also still using the talk at least 1,011 years after the battle, i.e. extending
its lifetime to 1948 or beyond.
The talk, in its various forms, sweeps across The Battle of Brunanburgh
and Cædmon’s Hymn; a discussion of meter, kennings, and alliteration; the
fusion between Germanic beliefs and Christianity; a brief look at Old
Norse; cursory discussions of Beowulf, the Old English riddles, The Dream
of the Rood, and The Battle of Maldon; and most importantly a brief mention of the two elegies The Wanderer and The Seafarer. Of the latter poems
Tolkien at one point states:
These are the words of men who knew the northern seas in
small boats. Anglo-Saxon verse has many echoes of the cold
waves, and the cry of the seabirds. It is, perhaps, not surprising that the reflective poetry of a people with the traditions
of the cold north seas, frozen in winter, should show two elegiac poems, in which the sorrows of the lonely seafarer are
a leading theme, and a symbol of desolation of spirit. These
two remarkable poems of individual sentiment, are also preserved in the Exeter Book, and are now usually known as the
Wanderer and Seafarer.
In the Wanderer the poet passes before the end of the poem
to the vision of a ruin, and a lament for the days devoured195
J.R.R. Tolkien and The Wanderer
by time, a poignant expression of a dominant Anglo-Saxon
mood: with this epitaph on antiquity, I will end this brief
echo of the now long-vanished Anglo-Saxon days.10
It is interesting to note how he sees The Wanderer as a closing down, an
epitaph, and this perhaps explains why it resurfaced twenty years later as
the appropriate text to be used at the close of his Valedictory Address.
As a slight digression, in A 30/1, ff. 41-68, there is a noteworthy
comment on the contemporary situation in Europe. Although this was
crossed through at some point by Tolkien, it is a good example of what
we shall see later on, namely “application” or his use of medieval literature to reveal insights into contemporary events:
Europe & Britain—perhaps Britain in particular—have an
intricate complex history racially and culturally. Nearly all
the worst errors come from attempts at false simplifications
in the service of this or that theory. I am not a simplifier,
dealing with plain polemic discussions in Nordic and Latin,
civilized and savage. There is not time to go into all that. I
only warn you in case you should suspect that I was a secret
Nazi and had gone all Nordic, because I wish to emphasize certain things which the bewildered and tragic nonsense
talked in modern Germany has made suspect. Believe me I
hate it—though as nonsense it only beats by a narrow margin much that has been written by H. Belloc in the History
of England. (f. 45)
As we noted at the beginning of this article Tolkien drew on The
Wanderer, quoting it during his Valedictory Address of 1959. Finally, from
1964-65 we have the most comprehensive analysis of the poem in an
unpublished response to Burton Raffel’s set of translations entitled Poems
from the Old English, to be discussed below.11
Considered together these manuscripts and typescripts provide us
with transcriptions, translations, glossaries, and analyses all related to
The Wanderer ranging from the 1920s through to the 1960s with six main
peaks of concerted effort (1927, 1938, 1942, 1948, 1959, and 1964-65)
plus a possible “missing” period related to his work for Methuen with
Gordon in the 1930s. It is tempting, of course, to consider whether it is
possible to collate these to present something approaching Tolkien’s edition of the poem. Table 2 suggests that this might be possible. By way of
example, here we have a collation of all the “transcriptions” and translations he produced of the ubi sunt lines (there is no evidence to suggest
Tolkien actually transcribed from The Exeter Book itself, but its facsimile
appeared in 1933). To an ill-informed observer, this may look like the real196
Stuart D. Lee
The Wanderer ll. 88-96 (ed.) J.R.R. Tolkien
Se þonne þisne wealsteal wise geþohte
and þis deorce lif deope geondþenceð,
frod on ferðe feor oft gemon (90)
wælsleahta worn. And þas word acwið:
“Hwær cwom mearg, hwær cwom mago, hwær cwom maþþumgyfa?
Hwær cwom symbla gesetu? Hwær sindon seledreamas?
Eala beorht bune! Eala byrnwiga!
Eala þeodnes þrym! Hu seo þrag gewat, (95)
Genap under niht-helm, swa heo no wære!”
---------------------------------------------------------------
MS: W2 = A38, f 14v [1926-1927]; W8 = A30, f.13 [1937-8];
W9 = A30, f. 21 [1937-8]; W10 = A30, f. 33 & ff. 37-8 [1937-8];
W11 = A30, f. 44 [1942 or later]; W13 = Valedictory Address [1959]
======================================
88-91] omitted W9; 92] mearg | mearh, W9, W13;
maþþumgyfa | maþmgifa, W9.
Table 2: Hypothetical edition
The Wanderer ll. 88-96 (ed.) J.R.R. Tolkien
“He then who these foundations with understanding
and this dark life deeply considereth,
old in heart he will oft remember (90)
many a cruel war long ago afar off. And these words will speak:
“Where now the horse, where now the rider, where now
the giver of gold?
Where now the places of feasting? Where are the glad voices
of the hall?
Alas, the bright goblet! Alas, the mailed knight!
Alas, the glory of the kings! How that time has passed, (95)
dark under night-shade, as had it never been!”
======================================
90] oft | omitted W9, W10; 91] afar off | omitted W9, W10; 92]
horse | steed, rider | knight, W2; 93] glad voices | revelries, W2;
94] bright goblet | goblet bright, W2, mailed | mailclad, W2,
W10, mailed \clad/, W10 ff. 37-38; 95] kings | king, W2, W10;
has | hath, W9, W10; 96] “obscured under the cloak of night as
had it never been,” W11, “faded dark beneath the cloak of night,
as had it never been!,” W2.197
J.R.R. Tolkien and The Wanderer
thing. Yet is this really a glimpse of an edition by Tolkien? The answer
is, of course, an emphatic “no.” If Tolkien had wanted to produce an
edition of The Wanderer he would have done so, probably as part of the
ambitious plan he devised with E. V. Gordon (mentioned earlier). What
we simply have here are the kinds of notes one would expect to find in
any lecturer’s filing cabinet who has repeatedly taught a text. Simply collating these does not an edition make. They are still what they appear to
be at face value—notes; the collected notes of a scholar over many years,
some datable, some not, some incomplete, some contradictory. An edition by Tolkien would have presented his final views on the punctuation,
spelling, and so on—in a far more cohesive form. That is not to denigrate
in any way the depth to which Tolkien clearly interacted with the text (a
sophistication, it has to be said, that goes beyond the standard expected
of basic background teaching material), but it is important to step back
and consider for a moment how Tolkien himself might have felt about
someone else producing an edition in his name from this material. One
would suspect he would have been somewhat dismayed.
Collectively, though, what we do have is a series of analyses of the
poem by Tolkien over several years which give us an insight into some of
the issues he considered worthy of exploring. We also have, as has been
recognised elsewhere12 and will be discussed towards the end of this article, his attempts to apply the poem both to his fiction and to his theories
of literature.
Let us begin with his discussions of the poem. Here, again, we must
be guarded in our use of the material and rather than cite randomly for
effect, we should restrict ourselves to only drawing on:
a) material that taken together shows patterns of consistency
from across the years, i.e. points of interest he came back to
again and again;
or
b) material that appears towards the end of his career and
perhaps illustrates his conclusions on the poem after a lifetime’s study of the text and its context.
First, there is the title of the poem. Benjamin Thorpe named it The
Wanderer in 1842, but many scholars throughout the years (e.g., R. A.
Peters) have been less than content with this, preferring something along
the lines of “The Exile.” Tolkien also disliked Thorpe’s suggestion and in
1926-7 was already toying with replacing the term “wanderer” with “an
exile” (A38, f. 13), or even “alone a banished man” and the “survivor”
(A38, f. 23). In 1964-65 he was still arguing for a new title suggesting198
Stuart D. Lee
“The Exile’s Lament” was more appropriate, drawing a parallel to the
German “Des Elenden Klage” (A 30, f.115). Tolkien, we can therefore
assume, agreed with C. T. Onions who, in his edition of Henry Sweet’s
Anglo-Saxon Reader (1922), remarked that the poem dealt mainly with exile
and only incidentally with wandering.13
The title, however, was really only a touchstone to Tolkien’s greater
concern, namely who was the character or characters at the center of
the poem—the so-called “anhaga” and “eardstapa.” We begin to get an
understanding of Tolkien’s views in his long exploration of the poem
contained in the lengthy notes dating from 1964-65 (A30/1, ff. 107-68).
He headed these:
Some thoughts on the translation of poetry—especially Old
English as aroused by reading “Poems from the Old English,
translated by Burton Raffel” and his Introduction. With some
particular comments on the text and interpretation of The
Wanderer and Riddle 8/9. (A30, f. 107)
It would appear that the American scholar Burton Raffel sent Tolkien
a copy of his book of translations (Raffel 1960)14 plus an article entitled
“On Translating Beowulf” from the Yale Review (Raffel 1965). As a token
of respect Raffel prefaced this with the address “Old English re-creations
for a far greater re-creator, whose hobbit-lore has bewitched my whole
family” (A30, f. 121).
Tolkien, in a series of unpublished notes, was extremely critical of
Raffel’s method of translation or “re-creation.” We can perhaps get an
insight into why this might have been by looking briefly at Raffel’s theories on translation as outlined in the introduction to his book (Raffel
1965, 11-14), which would seem at odds with Tolkien’s own views (Tolkien 1940). Raffel began by suggesting that translating was “a minor art
. . . almost impossible.” He argued that the “translator’s only hope is to
re-create something roughly equivalent in the new language” and talked
of “life in a new form.” By way of example, he used line 1 of The Wanderer saying that it literally meant “Often the lonely one asks [prays for]
mercy [grace],” or “The lonely one often asks for grace.” Yet even then
Raffel is not content, stating this is “not completely scop-like work” (13),
and instead settles on “This lonely traveller longs for grace” claiming
“it is probably about as much as the modern reader can be expected to
tolerate” (13). Tolkien’s disgust was evident in his acidic reposte.15 He
described Raffel’s work as “conceited nonsense” and detected in it “the
unwanted impudence of a parasite” (A 30, f. 161 and f. 121 respectively).
In a further insight into his own views on translation theory Tolkien remarked that “The making of translations should be primarily for private
amusement, and profit. . . . But publication of the result needs some199
J.R.R. Tolkien and The Wanderer
defence” (A 30, f. 107r). He warned that the translator should not “intrude any sentiment” of one’s own “nor to disarrange the order of word
and thought in the old poem, in an impertinent attempt to make it more
pleasing to myself, and perhaps to others” (A 30, f. 121r).
However, what is interesting for the purposes of this article is that in
these notes Tolkien takes the opportunity to not only attack Raffel, but
also to perform a fairly extensive analysis of the poem itself. In particular
he centered exactly on who or what the main protagonist might be (or for
that matter, how many there were). The “anhaga,” Tolkien wrote, “does
not mean just “lonely one,” but refers to a man living in special conditions and is not applicable (for instance) to a man in a boat” (A30, f.113).
The given title of the poem, to Tolkien’s distaste, derived from the “eardstapa” (l. 8) brought with it connotations of pointless wandering (A30, f.
117), and Raffel, it is worth noting, almost dutifully supplied “aimlessly”
at line 5 of his translation. Tolkien argued that the main person of the
poem had a purpose, namely to “reach a land where he had some hope
of being allowed to live unmolested . . . this is in fact what the survivor
says that he had done,” and equally important he was trying to find people in whom he could confide (A30, f. 117). For Tolkien then, “anhaga”
more probably meant “a man who dwells alone”16 or who has a “solitary
abode” (A30, f. 140) reinforcing this with occurrences found elsewhere
in Old English.17 This, it should be noted, is in keeping with the stance
of many other editors. Roy F. Leslie (1966 and 1985), T. P. Dunning
and Alan Bliss (1969), Bernard J. Muir (1994), Andy Orchard (2002 5 n.
15), Elaine M. Treharne (2004), Bruce Mitchell and Fred C. Robinson
(2007), and the Old English Thesaurus,18 etc, all suggest something along
the lines of “solitary man/one/being” or “one who dwells alone.”
Tolkien also discussed the possible historical context for the main
character. He suggested, again in 1964-5, that:
[the] Wanderer, and Seafarer all seem to be concerned with
nameless “types.” No names are at any rate mentioned. But
“types” are derived from individuals, known by expression or
from report and story, and it is by no means certain that these
pieces had not, or at least that the material they adapted had
not, at one time recognizable references to actual named figures of story: \e.g./ Seafarer to a mariner-adventurer a northern Ulysses-like character in his old age: Wanderer to an exilesurvivor of a national disaster, sole champion of a King’s
gesiþas to escape. (A30, f. 152)
Tolkien also turned his attention to an issue that has arisen again and
again in scholarship surrounding The Wanderer; namely the number of200
Stuart D. Lee
speakers represented in the poem (usually manifested by the punctuation decisions of modern editors). For example, one could indicate lines
1-5 as direct speech (as Leslie does, but rejected by George Krapp and
Elliot Dobbie,19 Mitchell and Robinson, and Treharne). Moreover, one
could also close the “main” monologue at l. 110 or alternatively allow it
to continue to the end of the poem (Mitchell and Robinson, Treharne,
and Muir, all close at l. 110, Leslie lets it continue to the end, whilst
Krapp and Dobbie open speeches at l. 8, and at l. 92, but only close one
of them). Similarly, should one strongly indicate the intervention of the
“poet-philosopher” at any point as Dunning and Bliss do at ll. 88-91?
As early as 1927 Tolkien was already considering many of these complex issues, remarking that:
At the outset we have a difficulty. A speech is begun by someone unnamed (an eardstapa) at line 8. Where does it end?
Sweet (and Onions)20 never closed the inverted commas—
though new ones are put in at l. 92. Should we close them
in the middle of l. 29 at wynnum? Or at 62 at maguþegnas? Or
even at 87 with stódon? All these have been suggested.” (A38,
f. 15v)
Notably this is four years before Krapp and Dobbie began to publish
the Anglo-Saxon Poetic Records and nine years before their attempt at The
Exeter Book. It is sixteen years before Bernard F. Huppé’s discussions of
such matters (Huppé 1943), and twenty-three years before Robert M.
Lumiansky’s seminal article (Lumiansky 1950). By 1964-5, despite all the
work published in the meantime which suggested a single speaker, Tolkien was still arguing for multiple roles—three in total: the “anhaga” as
distinct from the “eardstapa,” and the poet:
. . . the eardstapa is not identical with the anhaga of line 1: he
is a similar case introduced as an illustration . . . , the general
oratio recta of the piece is interrupted in lines 88-95b to introduce the similar case of the anhaga who finds his situation
of (?) and persecutions in his own land insupportable . . . I
personally believe that the eardstapa and his reported lament
ends probably at wynnum 29a /where ic/me gives way to
se/he etc\, and certainly goes no further than wynn eal gedreas
[36b]. The anhaga of 40 is the anhaga of 1.” (A30, f. 152v)
On a broader level Tolkien also recognized that the poem dealt with
important themes common to Old English poetry. In 1937-38 he noted
it as a poem of “individual sentiment” (A30, f. 20), and, as already observed, “an epitaph on antiquity” (A30, f. 21). In 1942 he suggested it201
J.R.R. Tolkien and The Wanderer
provided “glimpses of ancient things, echoes of an old world that has
now forever vanished” (A30, f. 44), but later added that it was also “timeless” (A30, f. 81v). He recognized that along with The Seafarer it captured
the “horror and allurement of the sea” (A30, f. 81v) but argued that there
was no evidence of sailing per se, stating categorically that the “hreran
mid hondum hrimcealdne sæ” (l. 4 of the poem) had nothing whatsoever
to do with boats (A30, f. 146).
Tolkien observed that the initial motivation of the poem (notably the
exile of the “anhaga”) was presented by the poet as a result of “wyrd.”
This was a concept that clearly interested him and he came up with this
attractive description:
What is wyrd? History . . . [This] can be viewed as an ineluctable series of events that marches on, without regard
to any man, Cæsar or churl; or as a flowing stream of things
that can by some great men, or by many men united in some
hope or passion, be turned this way or that: yet even so . . . it
runs down inevitably to the Great Sea at last (A38, f. 9)
Tolkien did not see “wyrd” as being in opposition to God, however, or
that the fusion of pagan and Christian beliefs in The Wanderer was in any
way “muddle-headed” (A38, f. 9). Instead he remarked that:
Past beliefs cast their shadow behind: the mood long outlives
them. The dominant note of paganism is regret, or indeed
despair. It may have fair gods or foul gods (or both); but at
any rate it has little hope (A38, f. 9v)
He did recognize that the poem was “touched by Christian sentiment”
(A38, f. 12v) but stated that “this is a poem of mood . . . not of philosophy
and religion” (A38, f. 12v).
Finally, there was the dating of the poem. Other scholars have suggested a wide range of dates for the original composition (e.g. Leslie suggests the end of the eighth century, whilst Dunning and Bliss argue for
the first half of the tenth century). Tolkien’s view was that it could not
be placed before the eighth century and favored a late eighth/early ninth
century composition (linking it to the ominous sacking of Lindisfarne
in 793, Jarrow in 794, and the rain of blood in York and dragons in the
sky—A38, ff. 10-12). In a sideswipe at some unnamed critics he argued:
We have, it is nonetheless murmured, the hackneyed hour
before dawn; the same old generous patron (the goldwine); the
wintry sea, of course; the crumbling ruin, alas!; the transitiveness of earth, yes, yes. But why not? These things are
fundamental at all times; and they must have touched very202
Stuart D. Lee
near the heart in England (especially the North of England)
round about the year A.D. 800. (A38, f. 12)
Tolkien accepted that the poem contained the stock images one associates with the Old English elegies, and recognized that some critics tired
of these (hence “hackneyed”). However, he saw nothing labored in their
use. Instead, to him they captured a range of very human and timeless
sentiments, and would have been clearly appropriate in late eighth/early
ninth century England with the Viking attacks. The Old English poet, in
other words, was capturing the spirit of his time but in a manner that was
“timeless” and cannot be criticized for that.
The title of this article suggests another way of approaching Tolkien’s engagement with The Wanderer, namely his application to a particular literary or social context. As we shall see in both his fiction, and in his
comments on contemporary events, he attempts to apply the message (as
he saw it) of The Wanderer in ways that again help to illustrate his interpretation of the text. In his poetry, for example, elegiac images, intermingled
with wanderings or journeys are evident—as in “The Town of Dreams
and the City of Present Sorrows” (originally entitled “The Wanderer’s
Allegiance”),21 or “Ides Ælfscyne” and “Ofer Widne Garsecg.”22 However, it is equally likely that these reflect his interest in The Seafarer. Scull and
Hammond in their Reader’s Guide (482) suggest a stronger link between
The Wanderer and his poem “The Last Ark,” mirroring the questioning
repetition at the opening of each stanza of Tolkien’s poem with the ubi
sunt passage. This, however, is not entirely convincing.
Leslie A. Donovan (697-8) notes that the poem has themes also recalling the Noldor Elves’ exile in Middle-earth, the link with the Ents
in l. 87 of the poem, the portrayal of the Dúnedain, and sees parallels
with Legolas’s longing for the sea in the depiction of the sea-birds of the
poem (though one suspects again that a closer parallel can be found in
The Seafarer).
The most obvious application of The Wanderer by Tolkien is its reuse
in The Lord of the Rings as has been regularly commented on. In the chapter entitled “The King of the Golden Hall” (TT, III, vi, 496-7) Aragorn
recites a piece of Rohirrim poetry which he then translates into Common Speech for his comrades.23 Aragorn explains that the poem is by a
“forgotten poet of Rohan” and is related to the story of Eorl the Young,
but obviously this is a paraphrase of the ubi sunt passage.
Michael D. C. Drout (2004) considers the poem recited by Aragorn
and compares it to its Old English “original” and describes this as transformation, noting that “if not for the very obvious parallel in the first
line (horse and rider), it would be difficult to demonstrate that the one
is derived from the other.” This is certainly true when one compares the203
J.R.R. Tolkien and The Wanderer
treatment Tolkien gives to lines from The Seafarer in the Lost Road where
there are much closer parallels.24 Yet the influence is clear. We have the
repeating of the direct questioning at the beginning of each poem (two
lines in the Old English of five questions, four lines in Tolkien’s poem
of five longer questions). These are then followed by lines of mournful
reflection lamenting loss and passing. The Old English is more concise in
its longing, but Tolkien feels the need to revert to the questioning mode
at the end of his poem.
Both use images one would associate with Germanic heroic poetry
(horse/rider/horn/helm/hauberk/harp—Tolkien; horse/rider/treasuregiver/feast/hall/cup/warrior—Old English). However, unlike the Old
English, Tolkien makes heavier use of end-rhyme (blowing/flowing/
glowing/growing, etc.), with an AAAABBAA pattern (though the last
two lines are slightly different in terms of stressed syllables). He does not
always attempt to retain the alliteration of the earlier text but occasionally retains the flavour (ll. 1, 2, 3 “a,” 5 [mountain/meadow], and so on).
Moreover, Tolkien makes interesting use of meter—generally maintaining five (lines 5, 6, and 8) or six stresses (the rest), even utilizing what used
to be known as the fourth epitrite (/ / / X) in lines 2-4 and 7—“bright
hair flowing,” “red fire glowing,” etc.
Yet Tolkien is consistent in his purpose. Bringing the analysis above
together, we can note that he is primarily accentual in his verse structure,
establishing a rhythm with lines 1-4, changing this with lines 5-6 (and
thus the end rhyme), and finishing with a mixture of both (6 and 5 stress
lines for 7-8). The reader, however, is brought along because the rhythm,
reinforced by verbal repetition and parallelism, is not lost. Although the
syntax, rhyme structure, and stress patterns change, it is always stands
out, and is performed with a sense of purpose. Even the pattern ending
lines 2, 3, 4, 7, and possibly 8, imitates the syllabic-accentual pattern of
Old English “D” verse (/ / \ X)25.
It is entirely appropriate that Tolkien chose Aragorn to recite from
The Wanderer, for he himself is a Ranger, one of “the wandering folk” (FR,
I, ix, 153), though, of course, again he is not aimlessly wandering. The
“eardstapa” (literally “the earth-stepper”) of the poem mirrors Aragorn’s
nickname “Strider” given to him by the men of Bree (see also Donovan
2007, 698). Like the subject of the Old English poem, Aragorn is in exile,
looking for his home, seeking peace and the joys of the hall. He is suffering, knowing the pressure on him to face the challenge of Sauron, and at
the same time bears the burden of his seemingly hopeless love for Arwen.
Yet unlike the Old English wanderer, Aragorn does not seek a Lord or
protector for himself, as he is destined to be King; what he lacks, at least
at the beginning, is a kingdom.
As noted above a paraphrase of the famous ubi sunt lines from The204
Stuart D. Lee
Wanderer is linked directly with the Rohirrim. The connections between
the men of the Mark and the Anglo-Saxons have been well studied, as in
the excellent analysis by Tom Shippey in The Road to Middle-earth (111-16,
182). Yet, as is equally well known, Tolkien attempted to downplay the
relationship to such an extent that he tried to argue that the similarities
were there only in a “general way due to their circumstances” (RK, Appendix F, II, 1110). Clearly there is an inconsistency. Modern scholars
consistently study the link, but Tolkien seemed at pains to distance himself from it. The answer again lies in his unpublished notes. In previous
work (Lee and Solopova 2005, 200-202) Tolkien’s reply to Raffel’s dedication of “Old English re-creations for a far greater re-creator . . .” was
noted. He specifically cited the example of the paraphrased lines from
The Wanderer and it is worth now citing this in full:
I have never attempted to “re-create” anything. My aim has
been the basically more modest, and certainly the more laborious one of trying to make* something new. No one would
learn anything valid about the “Anglo-Saxons” from any of
my lore, not even that concerning the Rohirrim; I never intended that they should. Even the lines beginning “Where
now the horse and the rider,” though they echo a line in “The
Wanderer,” are indeed not much further removed from it
verbally, metrically, or in sentiment than are parts of Raffel’s
“translation,” are certainly not a translation, re-creative or
otherwise. They are integrated (I hope) in something wholly
different, the only excuse for the borrowing: they are particular in reference, to a great hero and his renowned horse, and
they are suppose\d/ to be part of the song of a minstrel of
a proud and undefeated people in a hall still populous with
men. Even the sentiment is different: it laments the ineluctable ending and passing back into oblivion of the fortunate,
the full-lives, the unblemished and the beautiful. To me that
is more poignant than any particular disaster, from the cruelty of men of the hostility of the world. But if I were to venture to translate “The Wanderer”—the lament of the lonely
man withering away in regret, and the poet’s reflexions upon
it—I would not dare to intrude any sentiment of my own,
not to disarrange the order of word and thought in the old
poem, in an impertinent attempt to make it more pleasing to
myself, and perhaps to others. That is not “re-creation” but
destruction. At best a foolish misuse of a talent for personal
poetic expression; at worst the unwarranted impudence of a
parasite. (A30/1, f. 121)205
J.R.R. Tolkien and The Wanderer
Tolkien’s focus on “re-creation” is, of course, reminiscent of his views
on the fantasy explained in his essay “On Fairy-stories.” Indeed he goes
on to state “I might say “sub-create,” indicating that if successful the result may be new (in art), though all its material is given” (A30/1, f. 121).
Yet, again as noted (Lee and Solopova 202) this extract explains why
he downplayed the link between the Anglo-Saxons and the Rohirrim. It
clearly arises from his dual role as an academic and a writer. The former,
at this point, overtook the latter—i.e. he abhorred the idea that anyone
might read about the Rohirrim in The Lord of the Rings and feel they had a
true understanding of the Anglo-Saxons, or Old English for that matter.
The second instance where Tolkien sought to apply the message of
The Wanderer, so far unrecorded, appears in the collection labelled A38,
ff. 91-12. Underlying this is Tolkien’s theory of “eucatastrophe”—the
ultimate form of consolation in which a sudden joyous turn in a narrative presents the reader with the denial of “universal final defeat” at
the hands of evil, or more positively an evangelium in which the reader
glimpses evidence of the eternal joy. He related this to the “happy ending” in fairy tales, but evidence uncovered suggests that this also begins
to explain another attraction of The Wanderer to Tolkien. The poem presented to him, and to his fellow countrymen, a glimpse of light at a time
of incredible darkness:
I at least find more sustenance and support in “The Wanderer,” amid the present catastrophe (which seems likely to
leave Europe in ruins whichever way it turns) than in all the
pretty prattle . . . There is no happy ending to cyningas or
caseras \of this world/, whichever new names they may give
themselves, and whichever side they may be on, left or right,
black or white. (A 38, f 12v).
The comments here tentatively suggest that these notes date from the
mid-to-late 1930s or possibly the 1940s. The reference to Europe being
in ruins either refers to the build up to the Second World War, or the War
itself (it is too late to refer to World War One). If this is the case then it
follows that the new names that the cyningas or caseras give themselves,
may well refer specifically to “Führer.” The mention of “whichever side
they are on, left or right, black or white” is even more interesting as Tolkien also wrote “red or white” as an interlinear gloss. Thus this may well
refer to the ideological struggles raging throughout Europe at the time
between Fascism and Communism. As we saw earlier, Tolkien was not
against directly criticising the Nazis and disassociating himself from their
warped version of Germanic culture, but he may also be referring to
threat of communism from Stalinism. Tolkien was not shy of criticising
Stalin (see Letters, 64, 65, 66, and 91) even after the Soviet Union became206
Stuart D. Lee
an ally in the fight against the Third Reich. However, Tolkien found
consolation in what he saw as the message of The Wanderer, by inverting
the usual negative connotations in the poem linked to transience into
a positive, much as Deor does. The eucatastrophe is the realization that
although all things fade, so too will evil men (such as Hitler and Stalin).
Evil can never win and its power is transient—the quintessential glimpse
of eternal joy. As he remarked in his conclusion “The Old English poets
knew that at any rate” (A 38, f 12v).
This article has demonstrated that The Wanderer was a poem that
Tolkien turned to throughout his career and his engagements with the
text illustrate his academic beliefs, and the complex relationship that existed in his imagination between his studies and his fiction. It could not be
argued that his notes contain anything new about the poem, although in
some areas he was perhaps tackling issues earlier than others. However,
clearly it was a poem that he sought to apply in interesting ways not only
to his fiction but also to the events he was witnessing in the wider world.
NOTES
1 The fame of this passage was long-standing, see, for example, Bright’s
early article (1893).
2 References are to the unpublished manuscripts held in the Modern
Manuscript room in the Bodleian Library, University of Oxford. All
materials cited from these are copyright of the Tolkien Trust (2009).
3 See Anderson (19). Correspondences with Bridget Mackenzie,
daughter of Eric and Ida Gordon, suggest that if Tolkien did send
papers, or a near final draft of The Wanderer to E. V. Gordon, they do
not survive.
4 There are several bibliographies of Tolkien’s published material available, of which the best is in Scull and Hammond’s Chronology (813-
73). Drout (2007) attempts a more interesting analysis than the usual
bibliographies, but unfortunately his study contains some errors (e.g.
Tolkien, 1926, is listed as 1925; Salu, 1955, is listed as 1958; Tolkien,
1940, was actually entitled “Prefatory Remarks on Prose Translation
of Beowulf” and not “On Translating Beowulf”).
5 The 1927 lecture list is contained in A38, f. 16. Evidence (unsurprisingly) suggests that Tolkien continued to lecture on The Wanderer in
subsequent years. See, for example, Scull and Hammond’s Chronology
(154) where they note it was taught under “Old English Minor Poems” in Michaelmas Term 1930.
6 A38, f. 1, provides the reading list for these lectures. This included207
J.R.R. Tolkien and The Wanderer
Wyatt (1919); Sweet (1922); Kershaw (1922); and Sedgefield (1922).
See Scull & Hammond’s Chronology (139).
7 The poem appeared on pp. 159-163 of the 9th edition of Sweet’s
Reader.
8 This note is written in red ink, the same used at the base of A 30/1,
f. 21.
9 Copyright of Christopher Tolkien (2009).
10 Actually in variant forms across A30/1. The text on f. 33 presents a
good example of this, showing the multiple alterations on this single
folio alone:
These are the words of [deleted: people] men who knew the
northern seas in small boats. \[Red ink]Anglo-Saxon verse has
many echoes of the cold waves, and the cry of the seabirds [deleted: In particular these are] [deleted: It is, perhaps, not surprising that the reflective poetry of a people with the traditions of the
cold north seas, frozen in winter, should show] two elegiac poems,
in which the sorrows of the [deleted: solitary] lonely seafarer are
a leading theme, and a symbol of desolation of spirit. These two
remarkable poems of individual sentiment, \[deleted: timeless
naming no man or people]\ are \also/ preserved in the Exteter
Book, and \are\ now usually known as Wanderer and Seafarer.
In the Wanderer the poet passes before the end of the poem to the
vision of a ruin, and a lament for \the days devoured by time/
[deleted: mirth and glory swept away by destroying time] \a poignant expression of a dominant [deleted: mood in this earliest
English verse] Anglo-Saxon mood\: [deleted: an] \with this/
epitaph on antiquity, [deleted: with which] I will end /this brief
echo of/ [deleted: as an epitaph on] the now long-vanished Anglo-Saxon days.’
11 Scull and Hammond in their Chronology (250 and 323), also note correspondences between Tolkien and the poet W. J. B. Owen (1941 and
1947 respectively) concerning The Wanderer, yet Tolkien’s letters cannot be found.
12 E.g. Shippey (Road, 114, 160, 163, and 297).
13 For other discussions of this issue see Lewis (1957).
14 A 2nd edition appeared in 1964. Raffel originally produced his translations for the London Magazine 6 no. 2 (July 1959): 22-4.208
Stuart D. Lee
15 Whilst considering this it is interesting to note that in 1971 Raffel
again described his theories, citing R. K. Gordon’s translation of
the opening two lines of Beowulf (“Lo! We have heard the glory of
the kings of the Spear-Danes/in days gone by, how the chieftains
wrought mighty deeds”) as being far worse than Pound’s treatment
of The Seafarer. Gordon, he argued, had “failed to breathe life into
his re-creation,” suggesting it was impossible to do so unless you can
force yourself “away from the original” (Raffel 1971, 86).
16 See his notes for a 1927 lecture when, even at that early stage in his
career, he suggested “Oft doth he that dwelleth alone \live to/ know
. . .” (A38, f.13). Similarly, in his translations for the radio lecture of
1938, he provided “lonely man” for “anhaga” (A30/1, f. 13, & f.
37).
17 Tolkien considered various other Old English texts where the term
occurs. He dismissed the occurrence in Guthlac (B) l. 997 of “anhoga,”
suggesting this was corrupt and should have read “āndaga” or “appointed day.” He considered a scribe substituted “anhaga” as it may
have suggested to them the idea of “hermit.” With the occurrence
in the Phoenix l. 87, and l. 346ff, Tolkien argued that this implied a
“unique and solitary phoenix” (A 30/1, f. 141), i.e. who dwells alone.
With the appearances in the Gnomic Verses (Cotton) l. 17 ff, or as they
are now known Maxims II, he accepted the emendation of “earn”
to “earm anhaga” as it suggested to him a lone wolf separated from
or abandoned by the pack, or ‘”one living alone” (A 30/1, f. 141v).
The appearance of “anhaga” in Andreas at l. 1351 led Tolkien to argue that “He [Andreas] is called anhaga here, plainly because he has
been shut alone in a prison-cell” (A 30/1, f. 141v) and this is “comparable to an outcast” (f. 142). In Beowulf l. 2367ff this is an appropriate
description for Beowulf because of his isolation and bereavement (f.
142v), and similarly in Elene l. 604 as Judas is now alone “deprived of
all friends” (f. 142v). Tolkien struggled with the reference in Hymn IV
l. 88 (now known as Resignation) to “anhoga leodwynn leas” stating it
was “far from clear; but it is equated with ‘wineleas wræcca’ ‘forlorn
outcast’” (f. 142v). He added “this piece, though far inferior as poetry,
or even as verse, has close connexions with the kind of composition
best known and exemplified in Wanderer and Seafarer” suggesting “its
basis is older verse dealing with varieties of the anhaga, but that the
particular kind \here/ dealt with \wa/is the outlaw or outcast from
the society of men in his own land” (ff. 142v-3). He concludes “[as
with The Wanderer and The Seafarer] the sea again comes in, for the
lamenter thinks of the sea (97)” and thus he “must have had some
dwelling or refuge in which he dwelt, friendless and alone” (f. 143).209
J.R.R. Tolkien and The Wanderer
Tolkien also looked at the “Shield” Riddle, but missed the reference
in Psalms 101:8 (Lindelöf, 1909-14, l. 1576).
18 <http://libra.englang.arts.gla.ac.uk/oethesaurus/>; cited 19/5/08.
19 Krapp and Dobbie (1931-1953).
20 The 9th edition revised by Onions was published in 1922.
21 Lost Tales II (294-8).
22 Published in 1936 in Songs for the Philologists with E. V. Gordon.
23 It is interesting to note, as an aside, that Tolkien’s first drafts of these
chapters for The Lord of the Rings all date from around the end of 1941
and 1942, coinciding perhaps with his subsequent adaptations of the
1938 radio talk.
24 See Lee and Solopova (2005, 254-55).
25 With thanks to Dr. E. Solopova for her input on this.
WORKS CITED
Anderson, Douglas A. “‘An Industrious Little Devil’: E. V. Gordon as
Friend and Collaborator with Tolkien.” In Tolkien the Medievalist,
ed. Jane Chance. London: Routledge, 2003: 15-25.
Bright, Joseph W. “The ubi sunt Formula.” Modern Language Notes 8 (1893):
94.
Donovan, Leslie A. “The Wanderer,” In J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopaedia, ed.
Michael D. C. Drout. London: Routledge, 2007: 697-8.
Drout, Michael D. C. “J.R.R. Tolkien’s Medieval Scholarship and its Significance.” Tolkien Studies 4 (2007): 113-76.
———. “The Problem of Transformation: The Use of Medieval Sources
in Fantasy Literature.” Literature Compass 1 no. 1 (2004) <http://
dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-4113.2004.00101.x>.
Dunning, Thomas P., and Alan J. Bliss. The Wanderer. London: Methuen,
1969.
Gray, Douglas. A Marriage of Mercury and Philology: An Inaugural Lecture delivered before the University of Oxford on 21 May 1981. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982.
Huppé, Bernard F. “The Wanderer: Theme and Structure.” Journal of English and Germanic Philology 42 (1943): 516-38.210
Stuart D. Lee
Kershaw, Nora. Anglo-Saxon and Norse Poems. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1922.
Krapp, George P., and Elliot V. K. Dobbie. The Anglo-Saxon Poetic Records:
A Collective Edition. 6 vols. New York: Columbia University Press,
1931-1953.
Lee, Stuart D., and Elizabeth Solopova. The Keys of Middle-earth: Discovering Medieval Literature through the Fiction of J.R.R. Tolkien. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.
Leslie, Roy F. The Wanderer. Manchester: Manchester University Press,
1966. Rev. ed. Exeter: Exeter University Press, 1985.
Lewis, James. “The Land-Stepper, Translated from the OE Elegy.” Folio
22 no. 2 (1957): 46-50.
Lindelöf, Uno. L. Der Lambeth-Psalter: eine altenglische Interlinearversion des
Psalters in der Hs. 427 der erzbischöflichen Lambeth Palace Library.
Helsingsfors: Druckerei der Finnischen Litteraturgesellschaft,
1909-14.
Lumiansky, Robert M. “The Dramatic Structure of the Old English
Wanderer.” Neophilologus 34 (1950): 104-112.
Mitchell, Bruce, and Fred C. Robinson. A Guide to Old English. Oxford:
Blackwell, 2007.
Muir, Bernard J., ed. The Exeter Anthology of Old English Poetry, vols. I and
II. Exeter: Exeter University Press, 1994.
Orchard, Andrew. “Re-Reading The Wanderer.” In Via Crucis: Essays on
Early Medieval Sources and Ideas, ed. Thomas N. Hall. Morgantown: West Virginia University Press, 2002: 1-26.
Peters, R. A. “Philosophy and the Theme of the Old English poem ‘The
Exile.’” Neophilologus 65 (1981): 288-91.
Pope, John C. “Dramatic voices in The Wanderer and The Seafarer.” In Franciplegius: Medieval and Linguistic Studies in Honor of Francis Peabody
Magoun, Jr., ed. Jess B. Bessinger, Jr., and Robert P. Creed. New
York: New York University Press, 1965: 164-93.
Raffel, Burton. Beowulf: Translated with an Introduction & Afterword by Burton
Raffel. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1971.
———. “On Translating Beowulf.” Yale Review 54 (1965): 532-46.
———. Poems from the Old English. Lincoln: University of Nebraska,
1960.211
J.R.R. Tolkien and The Wanderer
Salu, Mary. The Ancrene Riwle: Translated into Modern English by M.B. Salu;
with an Introduction by Gerard Sitwell and a Preface by J.R.R. Tolkien.
London: Burns & Oates, 1955.
Scull, Christina, and Wayne G. Hammond. The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion
and Guide: Chronology and Reader’s Guide. London: HarperCollins,
2006.
Sedgefield, Walter J. An Anglo-Saxon Verse Book. Manchester: Manchester
University Press, 1922.
Shippey, T. A. The Road to Middle-earth. London: Grafton, 1992.
Sweet, Henry, ed. An Anglo-Saxon Reader in Prose and Verse. 9th ed. rev.
Charles T. Onions. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1922.
Thorpe, Benjamin. Codex Exoniensis: A Collection of Anglo-Saxon Poetry, from a
Manuscript in the Library of the Dean and Chapter of Exeter. London:
Society of Antiquaries, 1842.
Tolkien, J.R.R., E. V. Gordon, and others. Songs for the Philologists. London: Privately Printed at the Department of English at University College London, 1936.
———. “Prefatory Remarks on Prose Translation of Beowulf”. In Beowulf and the Finnesburg Fragment, trans. John R. Clark Hall. London: Allen & Unwin, 1940.
———. “Philology: General Works.” Year’s Work in English Studies Volume V
1924. London: Humphrey Milford, 1926: 26-65.
Treharne, Elaine M. Old and Middle English c. 890-c. 1400: An Anthology.
Oxford: Blackwell, 2007.
Wyatt, Alfred J. An Anglo-Saxon Reader. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1919.213
Copyright © West Virginia University Press
Essence of Elvish: The Basic Vocabulary of
Quenya
CHRISTOPHER GILSON
J.R.R. Tolkien concluded his 1931 essay on the “Secret Vice” of lan guage invention with some specimens of his own efforts in what he -
called
the one language which has been expressly designed to give
play to my own most normal phonetic taste . . . and which
has had a long enough history of development to allow of
this final fruition: verse. It expresses, and at the same time
has fixed, my personal taste. Just as the construction of a
mythology expresses at first one’s taste, and later conditions
one’s imagination, and becomes inescapable, so with this
language. I can conceive, even sketch, other radically different forms, but always insensibly and inevitably now come
back to this one, which must therefore be or have become
peculiarly mine. (MC 212–13).
The language to which Tolkien was referring is represented in three
of the specimen poems, “Oilima Markirya” (“The Last Ark”), “Nieninque” and “Earendel” (MC 213–16). It can now be traced back in all
of its details, insofar as they were recorded by Tolkien in surviving documents, to its emergence in the Qenyaqetsa or “Qenya Lexicon” compiled
about fifteen years earlier. It was in this dictionary with two and a half
thousand entries that some of the earliest of Tolkien’s mythological
or legendary names were first recorded, or those that appeared in his
contemporary poems were given linguistic explanations. In 1917 Tolkien compiled the lexicon of another invented language called Goldogrin
or “Gnomish,” many of whose words he designed to have etymological connections with Qenya, and words from the earlier language were
cited in the “Gnomish Lexicon” to elucidate these connections. In The
Book of Lost Tales, composed over the next few years, Tolkien elaborated
and consolidated the mythological conceptions that appear in the early
poetry and in some of the entries of the lexicons. The tales included a
fictional history of the Elves and Gnomes for whom Tolkien imagined
that his invented languages were their native speeches. In the early 1920s
Tolkien wrote a grammar of Qenya which shows numerous conceptual
associations with the Qenya Lexicon, but also expanded and revised
some features of the inflexional patterns of the language that could be
observed in specimens incorporated into earlier works. In the later 1920s214
Christopher Gilson
Tolkien continued this revision, recorded in a sequence of successively
more elaborate paradigms, and he also compiled various Qenya wordlists. During the 1920s Tolkien also worked on Gnomish, writing a grammar of that language and various word-lists in which a prominent feature
continued to be the etymological relation of the two languages, which
underwent some theoretical changes as well.
This is the history of development to which Tolkien was referring in
the essay, and the “one language” that he concluded had become peculiarly his is Qenya, although he does not give its name in the essay. The
fourth specimen poem in the essay was composed in Gnomish, which is
simply identified as “a totally different if related language” (MC 217). A
study of the vocabulary of the poems included in the essay, as well as the
draft versions that preceded them, has revealed that Tolkien used some
words that go back to the Qenya Lexicon, and others that emerged in the
later revisions to Qenya during the 1920s. It is apparently in this sense
that Tolkien meant that the history of development of Qenya would “allow this final fruition: verse,” insofar as it provided a sufficient accumulation of vocabulary for the variety of expression needed in poetry. And it
is in this regard that the earliest invented words of Qenya would still have
been part of the language unless Tolkien had consciously rejected them
or intentionally replaced them with something else.
In 1926 Tolkien had written a “Sketch of the Mythology” (revised
around 1930), in which he summarized the features of the Lost Tales
necessary to an understanding of the long poems based on the “Tale of
Turambar” and the “Tale of Tinúviel” that he was composing around
that time (Shaping 11). Successive expansions and revisions of the sketch
would produce the various annals and historical narratives on which
Tolkien worked at various times throughout his life. He would refer to
these collectively as “The Silmarillion,” and under this name a version
edited by Christopher Tolkien was published in 1977. In all of these
texts the Elves whom Tolkien imagined as speakers of Quenya continued
to appear. During the 1930s and 1940s he also wrote a more elaborate
“Quenya Grammar,” detailing the sound-system of the language, its inflexions, and their etymological connection through a theoretical common ancestry with other of his invented languages, including Noldorin
(i.e. ‘Gnomish’), for which he wrote similarly elaborate grammars. These
texts have not yet been published, but “The Etymologies,” in which Tolkien collected words from his invented languages that he derived from various shared “primitive” roots, has been published (Lost Road, 339–400).
This includes thousands of Qenya and Noldorin words, though not as
much vocabulary as in the early lexicons. It dates from around 1937,
at which point Tolkien was beginning to compose The Lord of the Rings.
Since Tolkien had included Elves, the imagined speakers of his invented215
Essence of Elvish: The Basic Vocabulary of Quenya
languages, as part of the background to The Hobbit, it was perhaps inevitable that he should include some characters who spoke these languages
in the story he wrote as its sequel, and so incorporate further specimens
of the languages as well. And indeed Tolkien stated in Appendix F that
“High-elven or Quenya” is one of the languages found in the book (RK,
Appendix F, 405). It should be noted that Qenya and Quenya are two spellings of the same word, like English color and colour.
We might ask then whether this later usage exemplifies Tolkien’s impression that he always comes back to the same invented language. In “A
Secret Vice” he asserts that the language inventor is free to make choices
of “word form in relation to meaning” (MC 211). Given this freedom,
and indeed the knowledge in retrospect that Tolkien continued to invent
new Quenya words over an extensive period, both before and long after
composing the essay, we might suggest that he delighted in changing his
invented languages and that the urge to do so was the primary motive
behind the developments in his conception. But we will see that on the
whole such developments can be understood as elaborations or refinements of the same overall linguistic form, and that this fits the evidence
better than the idea that Tolkien has ever transformed Quenya into an
essentially different language. In this paper we will examine the basic
vocabulary of Quenya as it developed in Tolkien’s conception, and we
will see how these words and their relation to each other are comparable
over Tolkien’s lifetime and exemplify that linguistic form to which he kept
returning.
Before beginning to examine its vocabulary, we should briefly consider certain aspects of the nature of Quenya as a language. Without
insisting on a specific definition of the term language, we can nevertheless infer from what Tolkien says in “A Secret Vice” that he considered
an invented language to be an arbitrary system of words, consisting of
phonetic forms and related meanings, together with grammatical devices—added elements and syntactic rules of combination for expressing
relations among words. He said that the eventual fruition of the invented
system was its use in compositions that satisfy some of “the instincts that
go to make poetry” (MC 217); so at the very least Quenya provides a
means to express ideas that have never been expressed before with precisely the same “relations between symbol and significance” (MC 218).
Fortunately, when we take into account the many variations in Tolkien’s
choices of association of word-forms with meanings, we can observe that
the actual documentation of such changes takes the form of revisions to
texts where the larger context includes other words of Quenya that remain unchanged. Our focus here will be on those words of the invented
language that survived as fixed and consistent features over extended periods of time.216
Christopher Gilson
Also, from the very earliest of Tolkien’s writings about Quenya he
envisioned the language as having varying forms which he described as
“dialectal” and “historical,” and for which he occasionally cited examples. The language of the Qenya Lexicon, for instance, is introduced as
“the dialect of Kortirion” and “the language of the Qendi, who are the
remnants of the Eldalie living now in Toleressea” (PE 12, 1). In the lexicon certain words are said to be from distinct dialects, e.g. felpa ‘seaweed’
is the Solosimpe form of the Qenya word filqe ‘fern’.
Tolkien’s appeal to aspects of a language that depend on its situation
within an historical time-frame leads us to another distinction that we
should make with regard to the nature of Quenya as an invention. In the
stories and fictional histories, such as The Lord of the Rings and The Silmarillion, Tolkien included characters whose native language is called “Quenya” and within the fictional world, which we are induced to imagine as
we read the stories, Quenya has thousands of years of history both as the
native speech of the Noldor in the First Age and as a second language
learned by their descendants and other peoples friendly to them in the
Second and Third Ages. Most of what Tolkien had to say about these
speakers and their culture is written in English, with only a relatively
infrequent mention of how their concepts and ideas were expressed in
Quenya. This suggests that what we are told about this language is only
a fraction of what we are intended to imagine must have been known by
one of its speakers, such as Galadriel, who had experienced so much of
its history herself.
To put it baldly, the “Quenya” of the stories is largely an illusion, a
fiction that Tolkien evokes for us by the careful selection of terminology
and construction of nomenclature using the words and devices of his
own invented language. This invented Quenya, on the other hand, while
it is not the native language of any speakers and is just the personal pursuit of a sole inventor, is nevertheless quite real, in contrast with the sense
in which Galadriel’s Quenya is only fictional. Although much of what
Tolkien wrote about Quenya is couched in the same feigned historical
framework as his stories, the essay “A Secret Vice” is one of the occasions
where Tolkien clearly discussed Quenya as an invention per se. Here and
in other such discussions it becomes clear that the corpus of invented
Quenya is not simply part of a notionally larger fictional Quenya that
Tolkien had in mind whenever he worked on its invention. Indeed he
stated that his invented languages were logically “antecedent” to the stories and have an existence independent of them.
We see this reflected in the fact that some of the texts Tolkien composed in Quenya were never integrated into his mythology. The poems
“Nieninque” and “Earendel” belong to the mythology insofar as they allude to specific characters from the Lost Tales or the Silmarillion; but the217
Essence of Elvish: The Basic Vocabulary of Quenya
connection of “Oilima Markirya” is much more tenuous. In this poem
the níve qímari (‘pale phantoms’) aboard the kirya ninqe (‘white ship’) that no
one sees oilima ailinello lúte (‘leave the last shore’) might be faded Elves, for
instance, but that is only one possible interpretation (MC 213–14). About
twenty years later Tolkien translated the “Our Father” and “Hail Mary”
into Quenya. Of course the frame-story of The Book of Lost Tales appears
to take place in the Christian Era, and in later stories such as “The Lost
Road” and “The Notion Club Papers” Elvish history is ultimately connected with fictional versions of our own time. But the latest version of
Tolkien’s prehistory in The Lord of the Rings and The Silmarillion takes place
long before this. So the “Átaremma” (‘Our Father’) and “Aiya María”
(‘Hail Mary’) appear to exemplify Tolkien attempting to use Quenya in
a way that was, at least at that point, independent of its fictional use in
the legendarium. In this sense invented Quenya and fictional Quenya
overlap each other to the extent that Tolkien used examples of the one to
represent the other; but they are not the same.
From Tolkien’s writings we know many words of invented Quenya,
with their phonetic forms and associated meanings, and an assortment
of grammatical devices for combining these words into phrases and sentences, such that we can construct Quenya utterances using only these
words and devices. Of course there are many concepts for which words
exist in English (or other languages) that have no equivalent in the Quenya invented by Tolkien, as was inevitable not only because new concepts
continue to be given lexical expression in the world’s living languages
long after Tolkien has ceased to invent new Quenya words, but also because there are many concepts in our cultures or those imagined by Tolkien which he either had no interest in giving lexical expression in Quenya
or simply never got around to doing so. We might identify such gaps, but
we can only know about the words of actual invented Quenya; and these
will be our focus for now.
So let us start with a list of nouns from the Qenya Lexicon, giving
their form and the associated meanings indicated by the accompanying
English glosses, words for concrete objects and abstract concepts from
the domains of both nature and culture: oro ‘hill’, niqetil ‘snow-cap’, tumbo
‘dale, vale’, tol ‘an island’, nen ‘river; water’, kelume ‘stream’, tinwe ‘star’,
aure ‘sunlight, sunshine, gold light, warmth’, lōme ‘dusk, gloom, darkness’, vilya ‘air’; ner ‘man, husband’, wendele ‘maidenhood’, atar ‘father’;
alqa ‘swan’, lōke ‘snake’, wilwarin ‘butterfly’, úvanimo ‘monster’; hen ‘eye’,
nie ‘tear’, pē ‘the two lips, the (closed) mouth’, lambe ‘tongue’, karka ‘fang,
tooth, tusk’, mā ‘hand’, rāma ‘wing’; alda ‘tree’, lasse ‘leaf ’, lōte ‘a flower, bloom’, miruvōre ‘nectar, drink of the Valar, sweet drink’, laure ‘gold’,
telpe ‘silver’; ondo ‘stone’, anga ‘iron’, tie ‘line, direction, route, road’; lūme
‘time’, tuile ‘spring; a budding’, lasselanta ‘the fall, autumn’, ambar ‘fate’,218
Christopher Gilson
olor ‘dream’, ōma ‘voice’, parma ‘skin, bark; parchment, book, writings’; lie
‘people, folk’, noldo ‘gnome’, tāri ‘queen’, heru ‘lord’, makil ‘sword’, sanga
‘throng’, tirion ‘a mighty tower, a city on a hill’, nōre ‘native land, nation,
family; country’, and mar ‘dwelling of men, land, the Earth’. Most of
these words will be familiar to a reader of The Lord of the Rings and other
late writings of J.R.R. Tolkien’s, since all of these words occur there in
essentially the same forms and the same or closely similar meanings.
In regard to the semantic side of these resemblances, we have to bear
in mind that Tolkien never compiled any list of Quenya words comparable to the early Qenya Lexicon in either scope or detail. While some
of these words are cited in the lexicon with the same succinct glosses
that we are more familiar with from the later materials, the lexicon often gives more detail about the meanings of words, usually in the form
of alternative, sometimes more specific, translations into English. For
example karka ‘fang, tooth, tusk’ appears in “The Etymologies” of the
late 1930s as karka ‘tooth’ and in the Appendix to The Silmarillion as carca
‘fang’. From this evidence we might conclude that there was a narrowing and subsequent wavering in Tolkien’s conception of the meaning of
the Quenya word. But another interpretation that seems more plausible
is that we are seeing the consequences of different purposes in the texts
where this word is glossed in different ways. The Qenya Lexicon, explicitly subtitled “Qenya dict[ionary],” provides a record of the diction of the
language, indicating ranges of established meanings of words, while in
the Etymologies the focus is on the words of the Qenya, Noldorin, and
Ilkorin languages with common origins, so that meanings are cited that
illuminate these connections. In the Appendix to The Silmarillion words
are selected to help explain the meanings of the nomenclature in the text.
We might infer then that karka ‘tooth’ was glossed so as to make clear the
etymologically significant relation of this word to karkane ‘row of teeth’,
cited in the same entry; while carca ‘fang’ may have been cited because
this meaning of the word better explains the sense of Sindarin carch that
occurs in the name Carchost ‘Fang-fort’, mentioned to help explain why
the name Carcharoth is translated ‘the Red Maw’ in the text (S 180).
Another example is tol, whose full gloss in the lexicon is ‘an island;
any rise standing alone in water, plain of grass, etc.’ In the Etymologies
this is not glossed explicitly but derived from a Primitive Eldarin form
tollo ‘island’ (Lost Road 394). In The Silmarillion Appendix tol ‘isle’ is given
with the further parenthetical qualification, “rising with steep sides from
the sea or from a river.” This citation actually represents both the Quenya and Sindarin words and the qualification is phrased to help explain
the examples of Quenya Tol Eressëa ‘the Lonely Isle’ and Sindarin Tol Galen ‘the Green Isle’, one of which is in the sea and the other in a river. It is
clear that Tolkien was not necessarily excluding types of water other than219
Essence of Elvish: The Basic Vocabulary of Quenya
the sea or a river as possible surfaces from which a tol can rise; and this
particular logical possibility is supported by the Sindarin name Tol Brandir
for an island in a lake. By the same token it is possible that Tolkien did not
mean the later definition to exclude surfaces other than water; so that we
cannot be sure that the ‘plain of grass, etc.’ in the Qenya Lexicon gloss
of tol has been forgotten. Perhaps more noteworthy is the additional idea
present in the later explanation of the word that a tol has “steep sides.”
This elaboration is a kind of change in Tolkien’s presentation of Quenya
words that we frequently encounter, where he gives a further nuance to a
long-standing conception.
We might also see a connection between this late explanation and
the fact that in the Etymologies there is another Qenya word partially
synonymous with tol, namely lóna ‘island, remote land difficult to reach’.
What these two words can refer to are not mutually exclusive, for lóna is a
component in an alternative name for the island of Tol Eressea, Avalóna
‘the outer isle’; but having conceived of the particular kind of island
to which lóna refers may have led Tolkien eventually to consider more
deeply the kind of island that is implied by the use of the word tol instead
of lóna. And it will be seen that this sort of explanation of Tolkien’s language-invention process only makes sense if we suppose that in writing
a later text he retained some of the essential concepts of an earlier text;
so that unless he explicitly rejects an earlier concept, we should investigate whether there is a way to understand a later text as an addition to
or elaboration of an earlier one that discusses the same forms or similar
meanings of Quenya words. Of course Tolkien does sometimes reject
linguistic concepts, and we must take these into account in our overall
view of his invented language. Even in such cases, since the rejected word
or device will usually be replaced by something else (or we would not
know it had been rejected), a full understanding of the process will require us to consider what has remained unchanged in the larger context
of the replacement. For this occurrence of new words alongside retained
words in a shared context can lead to the development of more subtle
nuances in their respective meanings.
Another example where we can observe Tolkien’s varying explanation of what seems to be essentially the same invented word begins with
the Qenya Lexicon item sanga ‘throng, tight mass, crowd’, which appears
in the Etymologies as sanga ‘crowd, throng, press’. In both places the word
is associated with a sword-name Sangahyando ‘Throng-cleaver’, which occurs untranslated in Appendix A of The Lord of the Rings, where it is used
as the name of a Gondorian rebel. In a letter of 1964 Tolkien explained
that the literal meaning ‘Throng-cleaver’ is to be understood in the sense
‘hewer of hostile ranks’, and he adds: “In Quenya this word meaning
‘press, pressure’ had as one sense the meaning ‘press, throng’” (PE 17,220
Christopher Gilson
116). In a letter of 1972 Tolkien again glossed Sangahyando ‘Throng-cleaver’ and noted that ‘throng’ is to be understood in the sense of ‘a closely
formed body of enemy soldiers’. The latest allusion to the meaning of
the Quenya word sanga is the most narrowly specific, but that is clearly
due to the context, and as the slightly differently worded explanation
from eight years earlier shows, Tolkien was not saying that sanga itself
only refers to the “press” of enemy soldiers, but rather that this is the
particular application in the compound name Sangahyando. Also, while
the explanation that the sense ‘press, throng’ is a concrete application of
a more abstract sense ‘press, pressure’ is newly conveyed as an explicit
concept in the letter of 1964, the idea was already implicit in the Qenya Lexicon, where the noun sanga is grouped with the verb sanga- ‘pack
tight, compress, press’. This exemplifies a sense in which a full understanding of the thought behind Tolkien’s later discussions of the Quenya
vocabulary requires us to consider what he said in the earlier writings,
even when the specific details are not recapitulated in their entirety every
place he discusses a particular word or group of related words.
On the other hand there are naturally many cases where the conception of a Quenya word has been further elaborated to include meanings
that were not already present at the outset. For example tinwe is glossed
simply as ‘star’ in the Qenya Lexicon, although it is there associated with
such words as tintele ‘a sparkling, twinkling as of frosty stars’, tint ‘(silver)
spark’, and the verb tintya- ‘sparkle’. In the Etymologies tinwe is glossed
as ‘sparkle’, with ‘star’ given in parentheses as an alternative meaning,
presumably a figurative extension. In the Notes on Galadriel’s Lament
in The Road Goes Ever On, Tolkien explained this explicitly: “The Q tinwe,
‘spark’, was, like S gil . . . often used in [the] sense of ‘star’” (61). The idea
that the oldest meaning for tinwe in Tolkien’s conception should be seen
as a secondary development from a more basic meaning ‘spark’ in the
context of the imaginary history of the language, arose naturally from its
relation to other words in the Qenya Lexicon.
But we can also see that the conceptual change was probably occasioned by the emergence in the Etymologies of a close synonym él, elen
‘star’. The history of this word was eventually connected with a primitive exclamation ele ‘lo! behold!’ which was uttered “by the Elves when
they first saw the stars” (Jewels 360). In “Words, Phrases and Passages,”
Tolkien’s own commentary on the Elvish and other linguistic features of
The Lord of the Rings, written in the late 1950s or early 1960s, he gives a
detailed explanation of how eleni refers literally to the visible stars in the
sky, while tinwi ‘sparks’ is applied to images of the stars, which Varda
placed in the dome over Valinor. This addition to the mythology seems
to have arisen at least in part from reconsideration of the poetic imagery
in Galadriel’s Lament, where she compared the long years to lintë yuldar221
Essence of Elvish: The Basic Vocabulary of Quenya
. . . mi oromardi lisse-miruvóreva / Andúnë pella, Vardo tellumar / nu luini yassen
tintilar i eleni / ómaryo airetári-lírinen ‘swift draughts of the sweet mead in
lofty halls beyond the West, beneath the blue vaults of Varda wherein
the stars tremble in the song of her voice, holy and queenly’ (FR, II,
viii, 394). Galadriel’s use of the word eleni would make her simile of the
remembered bliss in the halls of Valinor all the more poignant if the
stars she can see each night are metaphorically identified with the tinwi
of Varda’s domes that she can only recall, both having been devised by
Varda as Tintalle ‘the Kindler’. On the linguistic side this came to imply
that elen and tinwe coexisted as words for ‘star’ in Quenya, but each with a
more particular nuance and different associations through related words:
tinwe to verbs meaning ‘sparkle’ and ‘kindle’; elen through the application
of is adjectival form elda ‘of the stars’ to the Elves as the “People of the
Stars.”
A similar example is the Qenya word alda ‘tree’. In the “Gnomish
Lexicon” of 1917 Tolkien devised a word orn ‘tree’ which was cognate
to a Qenya stem orond- ‘bush’. Apparently the closest relatives of Qenya
alda in Gnomish were the words âl ‘wood’, altha ‘shoot, sprig, scion, sapling’ and alwen ‘tree’, the last marked as an archaic or poetic synonym
of orn (PE 11; 19, 62). Modifications to the Gnomish phonology led to
the conception in the mid-1920’s “Noldorin Dictionary” of a noun alt
‘bough, branch’ cognate with Qenya alda, while Noldorin orn ‘tree’ was
supplied with a Qenya cognate orne, in both cases the Qenya words being
left unglossed (PE 13; 159, 164). In the “Qenya Word-lists,” probably
composed not long after the Noldorin Dictionary, Tolkien listed Qenya
orne ‘tree’ and alda ‘branch’; and a few years later in the Etymologies he
cited alda under the base GÁLAD ‘tree’, and orne ‘tree, high isolated tree’
under a stem ÓR-NI ‘high tree’.
The earliest explicit consideration of the co-occurrence of these two
words for ‘tree’ in Quenya is in a statement by the character Lowdham
in “The Notion Club Papers”: “Alda means a ‘tree’—it was one of the
earliest certain words I got—and orne when smaller and more slender like
a birch or rowan” (Sauron 302). Tolkien would continue to think about
this remarkable difference between the vocabulary of Quenya and that
of English, where we have various synomyms for our word tree but none
that expresses precisely the nuance of the distinction between Quenya
alda and orne, and he explains the difference at later times. The mention
of these words in “The Notion Club Papers” remains perhaps the most
interesting for our purpose, insofar as we might suspect that the fictional assertion that alda ‘tree’ “was one of the earliest certain words” that
Lowdham knew of the Elven-latin is an echo of the fact that alda ‘tree’
appeared already in the Qenya Lexicon.
We have concentrated so far on the nouns whose essential place in222
Christopher Gilson
the Quenya language is attested over the whole lifetime of Tolkien’s
conception. Essential to Quenya in the same sense there are also many
adjectives, words that convey ideas of quality, quantity, or relationship
abstracted from their application to particular objects. Thus the Qenya
Lexicon has qanta ‘full’, otso ‘seven’, minqe ‘eleven’, eressea ‘lonely’; ninqe
‘white’, morna, morqa ‘black’, karne ‘red’, laiqa ‘green’, malina ‘yellow’; tāra
‘lofty’, ūmea ‘large’, vane ‘fair, lovely’, voronda ‘faithful’, aina ‘holy, revered’,
tūrea ‘mighty’; vanwa ‘gone, on the road, past, over, lost’, and nūme ‘west’.
As with the nouns we listed above, some of these adjectives have exactly
the same gloss in the latest materials.
Others were later given more elaborate definitions, e.g. quanta ‘filled,
full’; ninqe ‘white, chill, cold, pallid’; malĭna ‘yellow, of golden colour’; úmea
‘large; teeming, thronging’; and voronda ‘steadfast in allegiance, in keeping oath or promise, faithful’. An example with extensive documentation is vanwa, which is glossed in the Etymologies as ‘gone, departed,
vanished, lost, past’ and as ‘lost’ in The Lord of the Rings, in the translation
of Galadriel’s Lament. It is also mentioned more than once in “Words,
Phrases and Passages”: in relation to Sindarin govannen ‘met’ it is cited as
vanwa ‘gone, departed’; in the notes on the lament Tolkien says vánie- “is
the perfect-past of a verb stem appearing in vanwa, adjective ‘gone, past,
lost’,” and in the notes on the word itself, vanwa is “an old participial formation = ‘having departed’, hence ‘gone, lost’,” and also glossed ‘gone’
with the meanings ‘past, vanished, over, lost’ given parenthetically. The
essay “Quendi and Eldar” has vanwa ‘gone, lost, no longer to be had,
vanished, departed, dead, past and over’. This somewhat redundant set
of definitions illustrates that, while we can talk about Tolkien’s conception,
in the narrow sense of what he specifically had in mind when he wrote
a particular explanation of a word, nevertheless we can also talk about
a deeper sort of conception that runs through all the explanations of the
word and depends on their cumulative weight of evidence for our understanding of Tolkien’s full thought about it.
Our main concern so far has been with the varieties and variations
of the meanings associated by Tolkien with a given word-form in Quenya. We have discussed some synonyms like alda and orne, or tinwe and
elen. There are also cases where closely similar forms are associated with
the same meaning, and Tolkien may cite them together, suggesting that
they constituted a single lexical entity. An example is the adjective morna,
morqa ‘black’, where one of the forms morna is also attested later, with the
gloss ‘gloomy, sombre’ in the Etymologies; and in Treebeard’s phrase
Taurelilómea-tumbalemorna ‘Forestmanyshadowed-deepvalleyblack’, part of
a long name for Fangorn Forest, in later notes on which morna is glossed
as ‘black’ and also as ‘dark’. Other adjectives with two forms listed in the
Qenya Lexicon include ande, andea ‘long’; aswa, aksa ‘of bone’; iswa, isqa223
Essence of Elvish: The Basic Vocabulary of Quenya
‘wise’; orwa, orda ‘lofty’; and pirūkea, pirukenda ‘pirouetting’.
There are also nouns similarly cited with two forms, such as finie, finde
‘cunning’; hil, hilde ‘child’; híse, histe ‘dusk’; koi, koire ‘life’; losse, losille ‘rose’;
niqetil, niqetilde ‘snow-cap’; and olor, olōre ‘dream’. It will be seen that the
kind of variation is sometimes repeated, as between shorter hil and niqetil
and their longer forms hilde and niqetilde. The pattern of olor, olōre is also
similar to that of Valinor, Valinōre, a name that is widely attested from the
early to the late materials; and Tolkien explains the variant form of the
ending in nor by the fact that the word nóre was “in composition often
reduced to nor” (PE 17, 107). These examples of parallel variation show
that such alternation of forms with identical meanings is a deliberate
feature of Tolkien’s invented language with underlying explanations.
In a case like morna, morqa ‘black’, while there is no parallel variation,
we can see that each of the two formations is part of a more general pattern of adjective derivation attested by other entries in the Qenya Lexicon. Thus the syllable qa has been added to the root syllable to form several adjectives, such as arqa ‘arid, parched, dry’; fenqa ‘keen, cutting’; hulqa
‘naked’; ilqa ‘oily’; laiqa ‘green’; naiqa ‘painful’; nelqa ‘cornered; square’;
rinqa ‘round, circular’; saiqa ‘hungry’; and torqa ‘blazing hot’. The formation of morna is also parallelled by a somewhat smaller set of adjectives in
the lexicon, including aina ‘holy, revered’; melna ‘dear’; qalna ‘dead’; rīna
‘scattered, sown’; and tumna ‘deep, profound; dark or hidden’.
Of the adjectives derived with the suffix qa only laiqa ‘green’ is attested in Tolkien’s later writings, and for this particular word he decided—at
some point not very long after the publication of The Lord of the Rings, apparently the better to explain the cognate element in the beginning of the
name Legolas ‘Greenleaf ’—that the Quenya word was laika ‘green’ rather
than laiqua (cf. PE 17, 84). But there is also late evidence for the derivative suffix itself in the essay “Quendi and Eldar,” where Tolkien was discussing the stem *KWA, which “evidently referred to ‘completion’,” and
mentioned its use “in the formation of adjectives from nouns,” comparable to the English suffix ful (Jewels 392). It seems likely enough that the
conception of a suffix meaning ‘completely’ continues the idea behind
the formation of such adjectives as naiqa ‘painful’, rinqa ‘circular’, torqa
‘blazing hot’, etc., even though this was never explained by Tolkien at
that earlier time.
In a later note the adjective-forming suffix na is explained as the “simplest form of participle” (PE 17, 68). An example of this is the adjective
melda ‘dear, beloved’, said to derive from *mel-nā, which continues the
conception in the Quenya Lexicon of melna ‘dear’, but with the added
effect of the later phonological feature that in Quenya medial ln shifted
to ld. Since the verb mel- means ‘to love’, the etymological development
of the adjectival meaning is apparently from ‘loved’ > ‘beloved’ > ‘dear’.224
Christopher Gilson
And we can perhaps see here a sort of retroactive explanation of why
there are two adjectival forms morna and morqa both meaning ‘black’. The
etymological sense of ‘darkened’ for morna, taken to refer to the resulting
attribute, has approached the etymological sense of ‘completely dark’ for
morqa, so that they come to be felt as mere euphonic variants expressing
the same basic sense of ‘black’.
Synonymous pairs of etymologically related forms continue as a feature of Tolkien’s conception of Quenya. Among Tolkien linguistic notes
from the period of the late 1950s and early 1960s we have such pairs
as albe, alve ‘elm’; ambo, ambona ‘hill’; finde, findele ‘tress’; norie, norme ‘race,
running’; úvano, úvanimo ‘a monster’; vanie, vanesse ‘beauty’; yō, yondo ‘son’;
alcarin, alcarinqua ‘glorious’; ascene, ascénima ‘visible, easily seen’; finwa, fí-
nëa ‘dextrous’; lempe, lemne (‘five’); taura, túrea ‘mighty, masterful’; and vane,
vanya ‘fair’. In each of these examples the pair of Quenya words occurs
together in the same context, showing that each must have co-existed in
Tolkien’s conception at that time; but we can add that he was not obliged
to mention both synonyms every time he might want to mention one
form out of a pair of this sort. So the logical possibility has to be allowed
that sometimes two etymologically related forms with the same meaning
could be separately cited on different occasions without the later form
necessarily implying Tolkien’s rejection of the earlier form. Thus in the
Qenya Lexicon we had tūrea ‘mighty’, then in the Etymologies Tolkien
cited taura ‘mighty’; but the latter apparently did not replace the former.
For later, in a group of etymologies for words meaning ‘large’ and ‘small’
(probably dating from the early 1960s), under the stem TUR- ‘strong,
mighty, in power’, he cited the derivatives taura, túrea ‘mighty, masterful’
(PE 17, 115).
Quenya verbs show the same kinds of patternings in Tolkien’s conception that we have seen for nouns and adjectives. Some examples of
verbs whose stems and meanings in the Qenya Lexicon are repeated in
later writings include: lava- ‘lick’, mat- ‘eat’; karin ‘I make, do’, tulu- ‘bring,
carry, fetch; move, come; produce, bear fruit’, lant- ‘drop, fall’, anta-
‘gives’, qanta- ‘fill, complete’; tiri- ‘watch; keep, guard, preserve; look at,
gaze at, observe’, kala- ‘shine’, mel- ‘to love’; ista ‘know’, qet- ‘speak, talk’;
and tupu- ‘roof, put lid on, put hat on, cover’. For some of these the later
glosses of the Quenya verb are less elaborate; e.g. in the Etymologies tirin
‘I watch’ is cited and “Words, Phrases and Passages” mentions tir- ‘gaze,
look at, watch’. The repetition in the latter citation of three of the glosses
from the original lexicon entry shows that when Tolkien gave only the
meaning ‘watch’ for this verb in the Etymologies, it was for economy of
expression in that context, rather than a reduction of the conception of
the semantics of the verb down to this meaning alone.
We also see elaborations or clarifications of the verbal meaning. In225
Essence of Elvish: The Basic Vocabulary of Quenya
the Etymologies anta- ‘give’, for example, is derived from a primitive stem
*anta- glossed as ‘to present, give’. In a late note on the origin of the
comparative construction in Quenya, Tolkien mentioned that the verb
anta- can be used in two kinds of sentence construction, either as in antanen parma sen(na) ‘I gave a book to him’ or as in antanenyes parmanen ‘I
presented him with a book’. Here two ideas that are close enough in
meaning to refer to the same situation are differentiated in English using
distinct words give and present, while in Quenya the difference is expressed
solely by the grammar of the context. If the direct object of the verb
anta- is the thing that changes ownership and the recipient is marked explicitly as dative (or allative) then the translation of the sense of the verb
is ‘give’; but if the receiver is the direct object and the gift is described as
the means by which the action is performed then the translation of the
verb is ‘present’.
This is one of the more clearcut examples of how meaning does not
necessarily correlate word for word from language to language, a wellknown fact about natural languages which apparently Tolkien intended
also to apply to his invented ones. This is shown from the inception of
Quenya by the multiple glosses of words we have already looked at, like
karka ‘fang, tooth, tusk’, vanwa ‘gone, past, over, lost’, tulu- ‘bring, carry,
fetch; move, come’, etc. We also see this from the opposite perspective,
where more than one Quenya word is glossed by the same word in English; thus in the lexicon we have helke ‘ice’ and yalka ‘ice’. The former is
related to helka ‘ice-cold’ and hilkin ‘it freezes’, while the latter is related
to yalle ‘a hollow ring’; which may suggest the kinds of contexts where
one or the other of the words for ‘ice’ would be appropriate, in that helke
seems to emphasize the feeling of ice, while yalka emphasizes the sound it
makes, in each case by virtue of a sort of appeal to knowledge about the
meanings of these related words.
A more extensive illustration is provided by the following adjectives:
oiwa ‘glossy’, silwa ‘glossy’, latwa ‘smooth, glossy’, ilqa ‘oily, smooth, glossy’
and silkina ‘rich, fat, glossy’. When we consider some of the words related
to these adjectives—oine ‘unguent’, silwin ‘birch’, latsin ‘level, smooth’, ilin
‘milk’, ilma ‘oil’, and silqe ‘glossy hair’—we may begin to see how Qenya
can have so many synonyms for English glossy. Different surfaces such as
that of milk in a cup, the bark of a birch-tree, hair that has been brushed,
and skin that has been rubbed with oil or unguent, are each smooth and
shiny in a distinctive way; although for none of them do we have a separate specific adjective in English.
As another example of inter-language variation consider the verb
nosta- which is defined in the lexicon as ‘give birth to; cause’, while in
“Words, Phrases and Passages” it is glossed as ‘to beget’. In English “give
birth to” and “beget” are often used to distinguish the mother’s and226
Christopher Gilson
father’s role in the procreation of a family, and so we might be tempted
to see a shift in the conception of this verb from having one of these
meanings to having the other. But in fact the later mention of nosta is in
the explanation of Treebeard’s addressing both Galadriel and Celeborn
as vanimalion nostari ‘parents of beautiful children’. And of course we use
both “beget” and “give birth to” metaphorically when referring to artistic creation or other forms of causation in the abstract, an application
already suggested for the verb nosta- in the Qenya Lexicon by the definition ‘cause’.
It is also interesting to note that in the Etymologies the verb nostais not cited, but onta- ‘beget, create’ is given and a derived noun ontaro
‘begetter, parent’. This might suggest that a sort of conceptual shuffling
back and forth by Tolkien has occurred as to whether nosta- or onta- is the
Quenya verb that refers to parenting. But these words are from etymologically related roots or bases NŌ and ONO and under the former in the
Etymologies Qenya nosse is cited, equated with Noldorin noss ‘clan, family; house’ and apparently continuing the conception of the noun nosse
‘folk, kin, people’, related to nosta- in the lexicon (Lost Road, 378–9). And
in a late note these related roots are listed together as ON/NO ‘beget/be
born’, with the words onta ‘beget’, onwe ‘child’, and two occurrences of
the form nosta, the first apparently intended as a synonym of onta and the
second glossed as ‘be begotten’ (PE 17, 170). That the same form nostashould mean both ‘beget’ and ‘be begotten’ is supported by the existence
of other verb pairs with corresponding transitive and intransitive meanings, such as transitive orta ‘cause to rise’ and intransitive orta- ‘rise’. In the
context of a sentence they are distinguishable by whether the verb has
both subject and direct object or only a subject.
We are left wondering if there is a distinction in nuance between
onta- and the transitive sense of nosta- along semantic lines different from
our English distinction between “give birth to” and “beget.” We saw that
onta- is connected with onwe ‘child’ while nosta- is connected with nosse
‘folk, kin, people’. These associations could make onta- more evocative
of the literal sense of parenting of children, while nosta- would evoke the
relation of an ancestor to several generations of descendants that constitute a group of kin larger than the nuclear family. This could explain
Treebeard’s choice of the word nostari for ‘parents’ since his word vanimalion, literally ‘of some (or many) beautiful ones’, must allude not only
to Celebrían but also to her children Elladan, Elrohir and Arwen, and
perhaps also prophetically to Arwen’s future descendants.
The same variety of conceptual connections is found in many Quenya words. Without going into the same level of detail we can consider
the following pairs of items, each consisting of an entry from the Qenya Lexicon followed by a formally close or identical word with varying227
Essence of Elvish: The Basic Vocabulary of Quenya
meaning from The Lord of the Rings or some other late text: ainu ‘a pagan
god’, Ainur ‘the Holy Ones’; anto ‘jaw’, anto ‘mouth’; arda ‘a place, spot’,
arda ‘region’; elda ‘beach-fay’, elda ‘Elf ’; finwa ‘acute, sagacious’, finwa
‘dexterous’; harin ‘remains’, hára ‘stay’; hilde ‘child’, hildi ‘the followers,
after-comers’; kalma ‘light’, calma ‘lamp’; kelu- ‘to flow’, kelussë ‘freshet’; kemen ‘soil’, kemen ‘the Earth’; koi, koire ‘life’, coimas ‘life-bread’, coirë ‘stirring’;
kuru ‘magic, wizardry’, curu ‘skill; craft’; loa ‘life’, löa ‘growing, blooming’;
losse ‘rose’, losse ‘a laden inflorescence of white flowers’; lumbo ‘dark lowering cloud’, lumbo ‘gloom; dark, shade’; māra ‘mighty, powerful, doughty;
good, useful’, māra ‘good, fitting, proper, desirable’; masta ‘bread’, masta ‘a
cake or loaf ’; mindon ‘turret’, mindon ‘lofty tower’; niqis ‘snow’, niquis ‘iceflake or snowflake’; ongwe ‘pain’, ongwe ‘crime’; pata- ‘rap, tap (of feet)’,
pata- ‘walk’; pole ‘oats’, poli- ‘meal; grist’; ringa ‘damp, cold, chilly’, Ringarë
(‘December’); sili- ‘gleam, glint’, sil- ‘shine (with white or silver light)’;
silma ‘a ray of moonlight’, silma ‘crystal’; sūlime ‘wind’, Súlimë (‘March’);
ungwe ‘spider’, ungwe ‘spider’s web’; and Valar, Vali ‘the happy folk’, vala
‘angelic power’.
There are also many examples of close semantic correspondence
with variation in the formal shapes. Thus consider the following items
from the lexicon, paired with their later synonyms: alalme ‘elm’, albe
‘elm’; alkara ‘brilliant’, alcarin ‘glorious, brilliant’; ama ‘mother’, amya ‘(my)
mother’; amun ‘hill’, ambŏna ‘hill’; ande ‘long’, Andafalasse ‘Langstrand’;
avin ‘departs’, auta- ‘go away’; ektele ‘fountain’, ehtelë ‘issue of water’; falas ‘shore’, falasse ‘a wave-beaten shore’; falmar ‘wave as it breaks’, falma
‘breaking wave’; findl ‘lock of hair’, findele ‘tress, lock’; kaima- ‘lie quiet’,
cai-ta ‘lie (down)’; koivie ‘awakening’, cuivië ‘awakening’; lemin ‘five’, lempe
‘five’; līse ‘sweet’, lisse ‘honey-sweet’; lūne ‘blue’, luine ‘blue’; masta ‘bread’,
masse ‘bread’; matsima ‘edible’, mātima ‘edible’; māwe ‘gull’, maiwi (‘gulls’);
naiqa ‘painful’, naica ‘bitterly painful or grievous’; norne ‘oak-tree’, nordo
‘oak’; orda ‘lofty’, orna ‘high, lofty’; tasarin ‘willow’, tasar ‘willow’; Üri ‘the
Sun’, Úrin ‘Sun’; wendi ‘maiden’, wende ‘maiden’; and yāva ‘fruit, produce’,
yávë ‘fruit’.
In many of these comparisons we see that the semantic distance or
the formal distance is no greater than we find in actual citations from a
particular text of diversity of meanings for the same form, as with karka
‘fang, tooth, tusk’ and vanwa ‘gone, past, lost’; or the alternative forms of
the same word, as with morna, morqa ‘black’ and taura, túrea ‘mighty’. It is
possible in all these cases that Tolkien considered the later meaning for
the same form or later form with the same meaning to be a replacement
of the earlier one. These comparisons of early and late forms might
be viewed as typical changes resulting primarily from Tolkien’s urge to
change Quenya. We have seen, however, that such an interpretation
would involve an oversimplification of his actual process of invention,228
Christopher Gilson
leaving unexplained why there is so much in common between the basic
vocabulary of the earlier and later conceptions of the language.
Tolkien clearly did delight in the invention of new word-forms and
associated meanings that, as he expressed it in “A Secret Vice,” would
“give play to my own most normal phonetic taste” and together constitute “a long enough history of development to allow” for creative expression in the language (MC 212). Obviously such a history must involve a
cumulative elaboration of the invented language. Added words that are
rejected must be replaced by newer additions, with the remainder of the
language surviving intact and a net increase in the size of the vocabulary,
if the language inventor is to achieve the possibility of writing poetry in
which, again as Tolkien puts it, you “courageously abide by your own
rules” (219). And indeed, if poetry in the invented language is to employ
such traditional devices as the different degrees of metonymy or assonances of various types, then the language must have such synomyms
and homonyms as we have discussed, from which the poet can make his
particular choices of expression. Such a history of development must
also inevitably produce a clearer understanding of the diction, in the
sense of how context will be reflected in nuanced word-choices, if the
language is to become more suitable for writing.
A final example, with which we are probably all familiar, but may not
have considered in this light, is the word Elda ‘Elf ’. We listed its earliest
gloss above, the full definition in the Quenya Lexicon being elda ‘a beachfay or Solosimpe (shore-piper)’. This entry occurs with Eldamar, which is
explained as: “the rocky beach in Western Inwinóre (Faëry), whence the
Solosimpeli have danced along the beaches of the world. Upon this rock
was the white town built called Kor, whence the fairies came to teach
men song and holiness” (PE 12, 35). These entries are among the earliest in the lexicon, and on the same page in the original notebook there
is a rejected entry for Erinti “the Vali of love, music, beauty and purity,”
who dwells “among the Inweli, Noldor, Eldar, and Teleri in Inwenóre”
(36). Each of the other three kindreds mentioned here also has an entry
for the corresonding singular term: inwe ‘fairy’, ňoldo ‘goblin’ (changed to
‘gnome’), and Teler ‘little elf ’. These represent the earliest categorizing of
the imaginary peoples of Tolkien’s mythology.
In later entries and revisions to the Qenya Lexicon the term Eldar
clearly includes more than the Solosimpeli; the word inwe is redefined as
‘1 of the royal house of the Eldar’ (PE 12, 42) and the entry for Solosimpe
‘Shoreland-pipers’ also refers to them as a “tribe of Eldar” (PE 12, 85). In
the Gnomish Lexicon Egla is the “name of the fairies given by the Gwalin
[i.e. the Valar], and adopted largely by them,” meaning literally ‘a being
from outside’ and equated with Qenya Elda. The name Eglobar ‘Elfinesse’
is listed after Egla and equated with Qenya Eldamar, i.e. ‘Elfhome’, “the229
Essence of Elvish: The Basic Vocabulary of Quenya
land on the edge of Valinor, where the fairies dwelt and built Cor” (PE 11,
32).
Tolkien later gave two other explanations of the name Elda, both
found in the Etymologies. First there is the base ELED ‘go, depart, leave’,
in the entry for which Qenya Elda is glossed as “‘departed’ Elf.” This
was replaced by the base ÉLED glossed as “‘Star-folk’, Elf,” with various
cognates including Qenya Elda, and compounds derived from these, such
as Qenya Eldamar ‘Elvenhome’. The entry for the base ELED ‘go, depart,
leave’ was rejected from the manuscript of the Etymologies, but the related base LED ‘go, fare, travel’ was retained. And indeed both explanations of the word for ‘Elf ’ would survive, eventually alluded to in the
familiar statement in The Lord of the Rings, Appendix F: “Elves has been
used to translate both Quendi, ‘the speakers’, the High-elven name of all
their kind, and Eldar, the name of the Three Kindreds that sought for the
Undying Realm and came there at the beginning of Days . . . They were
a race high and beautiful, the older Children of the world, and among
them the Eldar were as kings, who now are gone: the People of the Great
Journey, the People of the Stars” (RK, Appendix F, 415–16). In certain
late 1950s “Notes on Names” Tolkien explained this by saying that when
Quenya Elda, which partly comes from elenä, an “adjectival derivative of
√ELEN ‘a star’,” was used “as a term for the Elves that set out for Valinor,”
it became “associated (in Quenya) with √LED ‘go, proceed’ . . . and Eldar
was interpreted both as ‘star-folk’ and as the ‘journeyers’” (PE 17, 139).
Over the years Tolkien had also considered other roots as sources
for or influences on the word Elda, with such meanings as ‘eldest’, ‘firstborn’; ‘exile’; and ‘the fair’ (Lost Road 356, 368; PE 17, 139). Insofar as a
language can be used to tell many stories, there is a sense in which a word
such as elda remained fixed in the language, while the stories that involved
the use of the word grew and were transformed in Tolkien’s imagination. In this regard stories would of course include fictional prose, poetry,
and feigned historical annals, where the Eldar continued to appear as
characters. Tolkien’s changes to descriptions of their nature and history
would give new meanings to the word elda, but it would remain the same
word in invented Quenya. This is analogous to the fact that the English
word elf is the same word it was a century ago, even though it has meanings for many English speakers now that it did not have then, largely as
a result of Tolkien’s use of the word in The Lord of the Rings. In a more
abstract sense we can also regard etymological notes, philological essays,
letters to readers, and any sort of writing that might give play to Tolkien’s
invented words, as different kinds of stories. We have seen that although
Tolkien devised a new etymology for elda that involved a new story about
the Elves and the stars, this did not necessarily preclude the continued
existence of the story behind the older etymology for elda connected with230
Christopher Gilson
their journey to Valinor, or an eventual reintegration of the ostensibly
divergent linguistic details into a more inclusive explanation. Whether or
not such details about a Quenya word were altered, the word itself would
still be the same word in the invented language; and we recognize this by
virtue of what the separate applications of the word have in common.
Because Quenya is Tolkien’s invention, we are unavoidably dependent on his explanations of the language in English for any understanding we have. As we have seen, where these are glosses or translations they
do not always convey completely and exactly everything Tolkien may
have intended as the meaning in Quenya. So if we are to avoid mere
speculation or guess-work as to what Tolkien might have intended, we
must consider the collective evidence over a period of time and throughout a variety of texts that is sufficient to observe whatever scope of reference or nuance we deem him capable of inventing. As the examples discussed here illustrate, we need to consider all of Quenya from the earliest
layer of words in the Qenyaqetsa to the latest philological commentaries on
the culture of the characters in The Lord of the Rings and The Silmarillion, if
we want to fully understand the essence of the language. What ties these
all together as parts of the same language are the meanings shared by
various forms, the words with varieties of meanings, and the associated
groupings of related words and names that persist from the beginning to
the end of Tolkien’s lengthy process of inventing Quenya. As this language grew through elaboration and refinement, and to the extent that
the basic vocabulary continued to be intimately interconnected with the
rest of the language at each step of its growth, through shared use in
Tolkien’s mythology and poetry and by mutual consideration in his linguistic writings, these words constitute an essential and persistent part of
Quenya that ties together the different phases of its growth. It is in this
regard that they can be seen as episodes in the development of the same
invented language. And in this sense Quenya is the language to which
Tolkien always came back.
QUENYA WORDS AND NAMES CITED
PE = Parma Eldalamberon.
NT = “Notes and Translations” in The Road Goes Ever On, 1967.
VT = Vinyar Tengwar.
aina ‘holy, revered’ PE 12.34, ‘holy’ S 355.
ainu ‘a pagan god’ PE 12.34.
Ainur ‘the Holy Ones’ S 15.
albe, alve ‘elm’ PE 17.146.
alcarin, alcarinqua ‘glorious, brilliant’ PE 17.24.
alda ‘tree’ PE 11.19, 12.29, (‘bough, branch’) 13.159, ‘branch’ 16.139,231
Essence of Elvish: The Basic Vocabulary of Quenya
(‘tree’) Lost Road 357, ‘tree’, Sauron 302, RK, App. E 401.
alkara ‘brilliant’ PE 12.30.
alqa ‘swan’ PE 12.30.
alqua ‘swan’ S 355.
ama ‘mother’ PE 12.30.
Amarto, Ambar ‘Fate’ PE 12.34.
ambar ‘fate, doom’ PE 17.66.
ambo, ambŏna ‘hill’ PE 17.90.
âmi, ambi, amaimi, amis ‘mother’ PE 12.30.
amun(d) ‘hill’ PE 12.30.
amya ‘(my) mother’ PE 17.170.
Andafalasse ‘Langstrand’ PE 17.135.
ande, andea ‘long’ PE 12.31.
anga ‘iron’ PE 12.31, RK 401.
anta- ‘gives’ PE 12.31, ‘give’ Lost Road 348, ‘to give; to present a thing to
a person’ PE 17.91.
antanen parma sen(na) ‘I gave a book to him’, antanenyes parmanen ‘I presented him with a book’ PE 17.91.
anto ‘jaw’ PE 12.31, ‘mouth’ RK, App. E 401.
arda ‘a place, spot’ PE 12.32.
arda ‘region’ RK, Appendix E 401.
arqa ‘arid, parched, dry’ PE12.32.
ascene, ascénima ‘visible, easily seen’ PE 17.148
aswa, aksa ‘of bone’ PE 12.33
atar ‘father’ PE 12.33, S 356.
aure ‘sunlight, sunshine, gold light, warmth’ PE 12.33, ‘day(light)’ RK,
Appendix D 385, ‘sunlight, daylight’ PE 17.120.
auta- ‘go away, leave (the point of the speaker’s thought)’ Jewels 366.
Avalóna ‘the outer isle’ Lost Road 370.
áva márie ‘go happily!’ PE 17.162.
avin ‘departs’ PE 12.33.
cai-ta ‘lie (down)’ PE 17.72.
calma ‘lamp’ RK, Appendix E 401.
carca ‘fang’ S 357.
carnë ‘red’ S 357.
coimas ‘life-bread’ S 338.
coirë ‘stirring’ RK, Appendix D 386.
cuivië ‘awakening’ S 357.
curu ‘skill’ S 330, ‘craft’ PE 17.83.
ehtelë ‘issue of water, spring’ S 360.
ektele ‘fountain’ PE 12.35.
él, elen ‘star’ Lost Road 355.
elda ‘a beach-fay or Solosimpe (shore-piper)’ PE 12.35, Elda ‘a being from232
Christopher Gilson
outside’ 11.32, ‘“departed” Elf ’; (‘“Star-folk,” Elf ’) Lost Road 356, ‘an
Elf ’ Letters 281.
elda ‘of the stars’ S 358.
Eldalië ‘people of the Eldar’ S 190, ‘the Elven-folk’ 326.
Eldamar ‘Elfhome’ PE 11.32, ‘Elvenhome’ Lost Road 356.
Eldar ‘the People of the Great Journey, the People of the Stars’ RK, Appendix F 415–16, ‘star-folk; journeyers’ PE 17.139.
eldarissa ‘the language of the Eldar’ PE 12.35.
eldasilqe ‘maidenhair fern’; ‘elf ’s hair’ PE 12.35.
ele ‘lo! behold!’ Jewels 362.
eressea ‘lonely’ PE 12.36.
Eressëa ‘the lonely isle’ NT 62, Tol Eressëa ‘the Lonely Isle’ S 59.
falas(s) ‘shore, beach’ PE 12.37.
falasse ‘a wave-beaten shore’ PE 17.135.
falma ‘wave, breaking wave’ PE 17.73.
falmar ‘wave as it breaks’ PE 12.37.
felpa ‘seaweed’ PE 12.38.
fenqa ‘keen, cutting’ PE 12.38.
filqe ‘fern’ PE 12.38.
finde, findele ‘tress, lock’ PE 17.119.
findl ‘lock of hair’ PE 12.38.
finie, finde ‘cunning’ PE 12.38.
finwa ‘acute, sagacious’ PE 12.38.
finwa, fínëa ‘dextrous’ PE 17.119.
(hára) máriesse, ‘(stay) in happiness’ PE 17.162.
harin ‘remains’ PE 12.39.
harma ‘treasure, a treasured thing’ Lost Road 360.
harya- ‘possess’ Lost Road 360.
helka ‘ice-cold’ PE 12.39.
helke ‘ice (in icicles, etc.)’ PE 12.39.
hen ‘eye’ PE 12.40, (‘eye’) Lost Road 364.
henfanwa ‘eye-screen, veil upon eyes’ PE 17.176.
henulka ‘evileyed’ Sauron 68.
heru ‘lord’ PE 12.40, S 359.
hil, hilde ‘child’ PE 12.40.
hildi ‘the followers, after-comers; Men’ PE 17.101
hilkin ‘it freezes’ PE 12.39.
híse, histe ‘dusk’ PE 12.40.
hulqa ‘naked’ PE 12.41.
ilin ‘milk’ PE 12.42.
ilma ‘oil’ PE 12.42.
ilqa ‘oily, smooth, glossy’ PE 12.42.
inwe ‘fairy’ >> ‘1 of the royal house of the Eldar’ PE 12.42.233
Essence of Elvish: The Basic Vocabulary of Quenya
ista ‘know’ PE 12.43, 17.77.
iswa, isqa ‘wise’ PE 12.43.
kaima- ‘lie quiet’ PE 12.46.
kala- ‘shine’ PE 12.44.
kalma ‘(day)light’ PE 12.44.
kaluva ‘shall shine’ UT 22, 51.
kare ‘(to) do’ PE 17.68.
karin ‘I make, do’ PE 12.45.
karne ‘red’ PE 12.48.
karka ‘fang, tooth, tusk’ PE 12.48, ‘tooth’ Lost Road 362.
kelu- ‘to flow’ PE 12.46.
kelume ‘stream’ PE 12.46, ‘flowing, flood (tide), stream’ MC 223.
kelussë ‘freshet, water falling out swiftly from a rocky spring’ UT 426.
kemen ‘soil’ PE 12.46.
kemen ‘the Earth (as an apparent flat floor under menel)’ PE 17.24.
koi, koire ‘life’ PE 12.48.
koivie ‘awakening’ PE 12.48.
kuru ‘magic, wizardry’ PE 12.49.
laika ‘green (of leaves, herbage)’ PE 17.159.
laiqa ‘green’ PE 12.52.
laiqua ‘green’ PE 17.153.
lambe ‘tongue’ PE 12.52, RK, Appendix E 401.
lant- ‘drop, fall’ PE 12.51, lanta- ‘fall’ 17.62.
lasse ‘leaf ’ PE 12.51, 17.62.
lasselanta ‘the Fall, Autumn’ PE 12.51, lasse-lanta ‘leaf-fall; fading’ RK,
App. D. 386.
latsin ‘level, smooth’ PE 12.51.
latwa ‘smooth, glossy’ PE 12.51.
laure ‘gold’ PE 12.51, ‘gold; golden light, especially sunlight’ NT 62.
lava- ‘lick’ PE 12.51, lav- ‘lick’ 17.72.
lemin ‘five’ PE 12.52.
lempe, lemne (‘five’) PE 17.95, lempe ‘five’ VT 47.10.
lie ‘people, folk’ PE 12.53.
līse ‘sweet’ PE 12.55.
lisse honey-sweet’ PE 17.64.
loa ‘life’ PE 12.52, löa ‘growing, blooming; a sun-year’ PE 17.159.
lōke ‘snake’ PE 12.55, hlóke, lóke ‘reptile, snake, worm’ PE 17.160.
lōme ‘dusk, gloom, darkness’ PE 12.55, lómë ‘night’ RK 385, ‘night, darkness’ PE 17.81.
lóna ‘island, remote land difficult to reach’ Lost Road 370.
losse ‘a laden inflorescence of white flowers (e.g. of hawthorn)’ PE
17.160.
losse, losille ‘rose’ PE 12.56.234
Christopher Gilson
lōte ‘a flower, bloom (usually of large single flowers)’ PE 12.55, lóte ‘flower,
a single bloom’ 17.26.
luine ‘blue’ PE 12.66.
lumbo ‘dark lowering cloud’ PE 12.57, ‘gloom’ 17.72, ‘dark, shade’
17.168
lūme ‘time’ PE 12.56, lúme ‘time, hour’ 17.13.
lūne ‘blue, deep blue’ PE 12.57.
mā ‘hand’ PE 12.57, má ‘hand’ 17.70.
maiwi (‘gulls’) MC 222.
makil ‘sword, broadsword’ PE 12.58.
makilya ‘his (or their) sword’ PE 17.130.
malina ‘yellow’ PE 12.58, malĭna ‘yellow, of golden colour’ 17.51.
mar ‘dwelling of men, land, the Earth’ PE 12.60, ‘dwelling, mansion’
17.64, mar ‘a region settled by a community or group’ 17.164.
māra ‘mighty, powerful, doughty; (of things) good, useful’ PE 12.57,
‘good; fitting, proper, desirable’ PE 17.74, mára ‘good, as it should be, in
right or proper form or state, in health, well’ PE 17.162.
márië ‘goodness; good estate, being well’ PE 17.162.
masse ‘bread’ PE 17.52.
masta ‘bread’ PE 12.59.
masta ‘a cake or loaf ’ PE 17.52.
mat- ‘eat’ PE 12.59.
mătie ‘eating’ PE 17.13.
mātima ‘edible’ PE 17.68.
matsima ‘edible’ PE 12.59.
māwe ‘gull’ PE 12.60.
mel- ‘to love’ PE 12.60, ‘love’ S 361.
melda ‘dear, beloved’ PE 17.56.
melina, melna ‘dear’ PE 12.60.
mindon ‘turret’ PE 12.61.
Mindon Eldaliéva ‘Lofty Tower of the Eldalië’ S 341.
minqe ‘eleven’ PE 12.61.
minque ‘eleven’ VT 48.6.
miruvōre ‘nectar, drink of the Valar, sweet drink’ PE 12.61, ‘a mead or
nectar drunk in Valinor’ PE 17.64.
morna, morqa ‘black’ PE 12.62, morna ‘gloomy, sombre’ Lost Road 373,
‘black’ PE 17.73, ‘dark’ 17.81.
naica ‘bitterly painful or grievous’ PE 17.151.
naiqa ‘painful’ PE 12.65.
namárie ‘be well’ PE 17.162.
nelqa ‘cornered; square’ PE 12.65.
nen (nēn· or nend·) ‘river; water’ PE 12.65.
nēn ‘water’ PE 17.52.235
Essence of Elvish: The Basic Vocabulary of Quenya
ner ‘man, husband’ PE 12.65.
nernehta ‘man-spearhead’ UT 282.
nie ‘tear’ PE 12.68.
nieninquëa (‘like a snowdrop’) PE 16.96.
ninqe ‘white’ PE 12.66.
ninque ‘white, chill, cold, pallid’ PE 17.168.
niqetil, niqetilde ‘snow-cap’ PE 12.66.
niqis ‘snow’ PE 12.66.
níquetil ‘snow peak’ PE 17.168.
niquis ‘ice-flake or snowflake’ PE 17.168.
ňoldo ‘goblin’ >> ‘gnome’ PE 12.67, noldo ‘one of the kindred of the
Noldor’ RK, Appendix E 401.
nor ‘oak’ PE 12.67.
nordo ‘oak’ PE 17.25.
nōre ‘native land, nation, family; country’ PE 12.66, ‘generation, people,
folk, large group regarded as of common ancestry’ PE 17.26.
norie, norme ‘race, running’ PE 17.169.
norne ‘oak-tree’ PE 12.67.
nosse ‘folk, kin, people’ PE 12.66, (‘clan, family; house’) Lost Road 378.
nosta- ‘give birth to; cause’ PE 12.66, nosta ‘to beget’ 17.111, ‘be begotten’
17.170.
nostari ‘begetter[s]’ PE 17.111.
nūme ‘west’ PE 12.68, nūme, nūmen ‘the ‘West’ PE 17.18.
oine ‘unguent’ PE 12.71.
oiwa, oiqa ‘glossy’ PE 12.71.
olor, olōre ‘dream’ PE 12.69, olor ‘dream; clear vision, in the mind, of things
not physically present at the body’s situation’ UT 396.
ōma ‘voice’ PE 12.69, óma ‘voice’ 17.67.
ondo ‘stone’ PE 12.70, S 359.
ongwe ‘pain’ PE 12.70.
ongwe ‘crime’ PE 17.170.
onta- ‘beget, create’ Lost Road 379, onta ‘beget’ PE 17.170.
ontaro ‘begetter, parent’ Lost Road 379.
onwe ‘child’ PE 17.170.
orme ‘tree’ PE 16.139.
orna ‘high, lofty’ PE 17.186.
orne (‘tree’) PE 13.164, ‘tree’ 16.139, ‘tree, high isolated tree’ Lost Road
379, ‘tree; when smaller and more slender like a birch or rowan’ Sauron
302.
oro ‘hill’ PE 12.70, oro- ‘hill’ 17.83.
orond- ‘bush’ PE 11.62.
orta ‘cause to rise’ PE 17.70.
orwa, orda ‘lofty’ PE 12.70.236
Christopher Gilson
oryă, orta- ‘rise’ PE 17.64.
otso ‘7’ PE 12.71, ‘seven’ S 364.
parma ‘skin, bark; parchment, book, writings’ PE 12.72, ‘book’ RK, Appendix E 401, ‘bark; (skinning, peeling off), parchment, book’ PE 17.171.
pata- ‘rap, tap (of feet)’ PE 12.72.
pata- ‘walk’ PE 17.34.
pē ‘the two lips, the (closed) mouth’ PE 12.72, ‘the closed mouth’ 17.126.
pirūkea, pirukenda ‘pirouetting’ PE 12.74.
pole (i) ‘oats’ PE 12.75.
poli- ‘meal; grist’ PE 17.181.
qalna ‘dead’ PE 12.76.
qanta ‘full’ PE 12.78.
qanta- ‘fill, complete’ PE 12.78.
qet- ‘speak, talk’ PE 12.77, 17.126.
quanta ‘filled, full’ PE 17.68.
quanta- ‘to fill’ PE 17.68.
Quendi ‘the speakers; Elves’ RK, Appendix F 415.
queta Quenya! ‘speak Quenya!’ PE 17.138.
rāma ‘wing’ PE 12.78, ráma ‘wing’ 17.63.
rīna ‘scattered, sown’ PE 12.80.
ringa ‘damp, cold, chilly’ PE 12.80.
Ringarë (‘December’) RK, Appendix D 388.
rinqa ‘round, circular’ PE 12.80.
saiqa ‘hungry’ PE 12.82.
sanga ‘throng, tight mass, crowd’ PE 12.81, ‘crowd, throng, press’ Lost
Road 388, ‘press, pressure; press, throng’ PE 17.116, ‘throng; a closely
formed body of enemy soldiers’ Letters 425.
sanga- ‘pack tight, compress, press’ PE 12.81.
Sangahyando ‘Throng-cleaver’ PE 12.81, Lost Road 388, Letters 425, (unglossed) RK, Appendix A 328, ‘hewer of hostile ranks’ PE 17.116.
sil- ‘shine (with white or silver light)’ S 364, PE 17.13.
sili- ‘gleam, glint’ PE 12.83
silka, silkina ‘rich, fat, glossy’ PE 12.86.
silma ‘a ray of moonlight’ PE 12.83.
silma ‘(white) crystal’ PE 17.23.
silqe ‘glossy hair’ PE 12.86.
silwa ‘glossy’ PE 12.83.
silwin ‘birch’ PE 12.83.
Solosimpe ‘Shoreland-pipers’ PE 12.
sūlime ‘wind’ PE 12.86.
Súlimë (‘March’) RK, Appendix D 388.
tāra ‘lofty’ PE 12.87, tára ‘lofty’ S 364.
tāri ‘queen’ PE 12.87, tári- ‘queen’ 17.67.237
Essence of Elvish: The Basic Vocabulary of Quenya
tasar ‘willow’ PE 17.81.
tasarin ‘willow’ PE 12.90.
taura ‘mighty’ Lost Road 395, taura, túrea ‘mighty, masterful’ PE 17.115.
Taurelilómea-tumbalemorna ‘Forestmanyshadowed-deepvalleyblack’ TT, III,
iv, 70, RK, Appendix F 409.
Teler (teleř) ‘little elf ’; Teleř ‘one of the Elf-kindreds’ PE 12.91.
telpe ‘silver’ PE 12.91, UT 266.
tie ‘line, direction, route, road’ PE 12.90, ‘path; road, way’ 17.72.
tint ‘(silver) spark’ PE 12.92.
Tintalle ‘the Kindler’ FR, II, viii, 394.
tintele ‘a sparkling, twinkling as of frosty stars’ PE 12.92.
tintya- ‘sparkle’ PE 12.92.
tinwe ‘star’ PE 12.92, ‘sparkle (star)’ Lost Road 393, ‘spark; star’ NT 61.
tiri- ‘watch; keep, guard, preserve; look at, gaze at, observe’ PE 12.93,
tir- ‘gaze, look at, watch’ 17.25.
tirin ‘I watch’ Lost Road 394.
tirion ‘a mighty tower, a city on a hill’ PE 12.93.
Tirion ‘great watch-tower’ NT 65.
tol ‘an island; any rise standing alone in water, plain of grass, etc.’ PE
12.94, (‘island’) Lost Road 394, ‘isle; (rising with steep sides from the sea
or from a river)’ S 365.
Tol-eressea ‘Lonely isle’ PE 12.94, Tol Eressëa ‘the Lonely Isle’ S 59.
torqa ‘blazing hot’ PE 12.94.
tuile ‘spring; a budding’ PE 12.96, tuilë ‘spring’ RK, Appendix D 385–6.
tulu- ‘bring, carry, fetch; move, come; produce, bear fruit’ PE 12.95.
tumbo ‘dale, vale’ PE 12.95, ‘deep vale’ PE 17.81.
tumna ‘deep, profound; dark or hidden’ PE 12.95.
tupu- ‘roof, put lid on, put hat on, cover’ PE 12.95.
tūrea ‘mighty’ PE 12.95, taura, túrea ‘mighty, masterful’ 17.115.
tyelpe ‘silver’ UT 266.
ūmea ‘large’ PE 12.97, úmea ‘large, of throng; teeming, thronging’
17.115.
ungwe ‘spider’ PE 12.98.
ungwe ‘spider’s web’ RK, Appendix E 401.
untúpa ‘is covering over’ PE 17.73, ‘down-roofs’ NT 59.
Ur, Ūri ‘the Sun’ PE 12.98.
Úrin ‘Sun’ PE 17.148.
utúlien ‘I have come’ PE 17.103.
úvanimo ‘monster’ PE 12.99, úvano, úvanimo ‘a monster, corrupt or evil
creature’ 17.150.
vala ‘angelic power’ RK, Appendix E 401.
Valar, Vali ‘the happy folk’ PE 12.99.
Valinor, Valinōre ‘Asgard’ PE 12.99, Valinor, Valinóre ‘land of the Gods in the238
Christopher Gilson
West’ Lost Road 350, ‘Land of the Valar’ PE 17.26.
vane (i) ‘fair, lovely’ PE 12.99, vane (vanĭ) ‘fair’ 17.56.
vanie, vanesse ‘beauty’ PE 17.56.
vanimalion nostari ‘parents of beautiful children’ RK, VI, vi, 259, Letters
308.
vanwa ‘gone, on the road, past, over, lost’ PE 12.99, ‘gone, departed, vanished, lost, past’ Lost Road 397, ‘lost’ FR, II, viii, 394, ‘gone, departed’ PE
17.16, ‘gone, past, lost’ 17.63, ‘gone (past, vanished, over, lost)’, ‘having
departed; gone, lost’ 17.74, ‘gone, lost, no longer to be had, vanished,
departed, dead, past and over’ Jewels 366.
vanya ‘fair’ PE 17.56.
Vilya ‘air (lower)’ PE 12.101, vilya ‘air, sky’ RK, Appendix E 401.
vorond, voronda ‘faithful’ PE 12.102, voronda ‘steadfast in allegiance, in keeping oath or promise; faithful’ UT 317.
wende ‘maiden’ PE 17.190.
wendele ‘maidenhood’ PE 12.103, 17.191.
wendi ‘maiden’ PE 12.103.
wilwarin ‘butterfly’ PE 12.104, S 354.
yalka ‘ice’ PE 12.105.
yalle ‘a hollow ring’ PE 12.105.
yāva ‘fruit, produce’ PE 12.105.
yávë ‘fruit’ S 365.
yō, yon, yondo ‘son’ PE 17.190.
WORKS CITED
TOLKIEN, J.R.R. The Alphabet of Rúmil & Early Noldorin Fragments, ed.
Christopher Gilson, Bill Welden, Carl F. Hostetter and Patrick
Wynne. Cupertino, CA: Parma Eldalamberon, 2001. Parma Eldalamberon no. 13.
———. Early Elvish Poetry and Pre-Fëanorian Alphabets, ed. Christopher Gilson, Arden R. Smith, Patrick Wynne, Carl F. Hostetter, and Bill
Welden. Cupertino, CA: Parma Eldalamberon, 2006. Parma Eldalamberon no. 16.
———. “Eldarin Hands, Fingers & Numerals and Related Writings,”
ed. Patrick Wynne, Vinyar Tengwar no. 47 (February 2005) “Part
One”: 3-42; no. 48 (December 2005): “Part Two”: 4-34.
———. I·Lam na·Ngoldathon: The Grammar and Lexicon of the Gnomish Tongue,
ed. Christopher Gilson, Patrick Wynne, Arden R. Smith, and
Carl F. Hostetter. Walnut Creek, CA: Parma Eldalamberon,
1995. Parma Eldalamberon no. 11.239
Essence of Elvish: The Basic Vocabulary of Quenya
———. “Notes and Translations.” In The Road Goes Ever On: A Song Cycle,
music by Donald Swann, poems by J.R.R. Tolkien. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 1967: 55-68.
———. Qenyaqetsa: The Qenya Phonology and Lexicon, together with The Poetic
and Mythologic Words of Eldarissa, ed. Christopher Gilson, Carl F.
Hostetter, Patrick Wynne, and Arden R. Smith. Cupertino, CA:
Parma Eldalamberon, 1998. Parma Eldalamberon no. 12.
———. Words, Phrases & Passages in “The Lord of the Rings” ed. Christopher Gilson. Mountain View, CA: Parma Eldelamberon, 2007.
Parma Eldalamberon no. 17.241
Copyright © West Virginia University Press
Book Reviews
Tolkien On Fairy-stories: Expanded Edition, with Commentary and Notes, by
J.R.R. Tolkien. Edited by Verlyn Flieger and Douglas A. Anderson.
London: HarperCollins, 2008. 320 pp. £16.99 (hardcover) ISBN
9780007244669.
Tolkien’s essay “On Fairy-stories,” which most of us know from its
1964 publication together with the story “Leaf by Niggle” in Tree and
Leaf, had been through two public appearances and several versions before that date. In 1938 Tolkien was asked if he would give the annual
Andrew Lang Lecture at the University of St Andrews, Scotland, and
chose the topic of fairy tales, which had been very much a concern of
Lang’s. Tolkien had already been thinking about the association of fairy
tales with children, and the lecture gave him the chance to argue that this
association was in fact an accident. He was intending to write a major
fairy tale, and wanted to argue that such writing was and always had
been matter for adults. A public platform on which to demonstrate this
came at just the right time. Immediately after the lecture he resumed the
writing of The Lord of the Rings, which he had begun in December 1937.
Though we have what is probably a draft of the lecture, we do not
have a copy of the lecture itself, only commentaries on it in two newspaper reports that are given here. In the chaos of the war beginning it never
saw print. However in 1943, Tolkien was invited to contribute to a festschrift for Charles Williams, and began revising and enlarging the lecture
on fairy tales for this. Possibly he felt this piece was most appropriate for
Williams, who, like himself, wrote in the fantasy mode; and perhaps the
Christian character of Williams’s work also made Tolkien begin stressing the potentially Christian happy ending of fairy tale. Tolkien’s work
on the essay exists in manuscript in the Bodleian, and Verlyn Flieger
and Douglas Anderson have here done admirable work in transcribing it
through all its vagaries. The collection, Essays Presented to Charles Williams,
was not published until 1947, by which time Williams’s death in 1945
had turned it from festschrift to memorial.
For the next years Tolkien was continually absorbed in The Lord of the
Rings, but in 1955, with the completion and early success of that work, he
complained that the essay was long out of print. However it was not till
1959 that his publishers Allen and Unwin agreed to a contract for it, and
then only if he included an illustrative fairy-story to pad out what otherwise would have been too thin a volume. Tolkien made a few revisions to
the essay as it had appeared in the Williams volume, but it was a further242
Book Reviews
five years until the essay actually appeared in Tree and Leaf.
Tolkien On Fairy-stories gives us a very full picture of the changing content of Tolkien’s essay, which was revised during the composition of The
Lord of the Rings. Flieger and Anderson first reprint the final version of
1964 in its entirety, adding their own notes and commentary. Then they
summarise the entire manuscript and publication history behind this final version, noting and commenting on all the changes made by Tolkien.
This summary is followed by two contemporary newspaper reviews of
the original Lang lecture, one of these taken from the other: but the
main one, from the St Andrews Citizen, and evidently using shorthand,
summarises the content of the lecture in great detail. The remainder of
the book transcribes two manuscripts, called “A” and “B,” the one purportedly a draft of the Lang lecture, and the other both a second draft
of the lecture and a series of interpolated observations and notes Tolkien
made over the years prior to the Williams collection. These manuscripts
are annotated.
Astonishingly, these two manuscripts, from the Bodleian Library in
Oxford, have never previously been published. “A,” which is numbered
consecutively, only starts at page 5, and ends at page 28 in the midst of
discussing “escape” in fairy stories. The editors believe that these missing
pages were recycled in Manuscript “B,” “whose introductory pages overlap closely the presumed but missing beginning of A, and which picks up
and continues from where A breaks off ” (173). In other words Tolkien
simply lifted these pages from his first draft to use in his second.
The editors conclude with a bibliography of the works consulted in
preparing their edition, and with another listing the works Tolkien read
or cited in preparing the essay “On Fairy-stories” itself. The only deficiency here is the absence of a list of works written to comment on or
explicate the essay, particularly in relation to The Lord of the Rings, for
which it was the ground plan.
In appearance this volume is very attractive, with its jacket front an
apposite painting by Tolkien himself, “The Shores of Faery” (1915). This
painting is of two bent and poisoned trees framing a semi-circular image of Valinor. It is shot through with long golden and white spears of
light cast by the final moon- and sun-fruits of the dying trees; and this is
so reminiscent of Blake, that one begins to wonder how much Tolkien
may have owed to him in other respects. The book itself is a stout black
hardback which is easy to open out and does not crack, printed on thick
paper with very readable type. Unfortunately, however, all the page references for the annotations to A and B are wrong by two and three pages
respectively (these are corrected in the second printing).
As for the ordering of the material in the book, with the final 1964
version of the essay coming before all the preceding versions, I do not243
Book Reviews
myself feel very comfortable with this. Since the book is showing the
changes to “On Fairy-stories” over the years, it would seem natural to
place the final form last. Again, it might seem more appropriate to place
Manuscript A, if it is being seen as a draft of the lecture, before the newspaper reports of the lecture itself. And if one can identify the pages from
1 to 4 and from 28 to the end that have simply been lifted from Manuscript A and slotted into Manuscript B, might it not have been better to
replace them in A while noting their re-use in B? I can see the wish to
place published material all in one place, and manuscripts in another, but
I cannot find any other reason for the arrangement as it stands. Certainly
it caused me some confusion in mentally leaping back and forth.
What then does this assemblage show us? The very detailed record
of Tolkien’s original Lang Lecture in the St Andrews Citizen shows that its
central point was that the fairy-story was not about fairies but “Faërie.”
This led to a dismissal of various forms hitherto seen as fairy-stories, such
as beast-fables. In this Tolkien’s lecture was initially directed at the more
inclusive views of Andrew Lang and other nineteenth-century scholars
of fairy-stories, in contact with which he began to form his own ideas.
The lecture in that sense seems to have been introspective in character,
Tolkien feeling his way.
After Tolkien had stated his idea of fairy-story in contrast to these
figures, he seems to have spent a good part of the time left on the nature
of escape in fairy-story. Here he was beginning to look more towards his
own work, and to providing it with a philosophic underpinning. As part
of this, that the association of fairy-stories with children was a historical
accident, and that the outlook of fairy tales has no essential link with
childhood. While allowing that “Escape” was an essential characteristic
of fairy tale, he denied that this was any failure of maturity, and used
the comparison of the prisoner’s natural wish to escape confinement to
justify a flight from modern “reality” and mechanised culture. (After this
Tolkien engaged at length in a discussion of Victorian clothing that became a digression. These remarks were to be so truncated by the time of
the 1964 publication of the essay as to be well-nigh incomprehensible:
Tolkien had here let a hobby-horse run away with him.)
The Lang lecture is marking out the ground of the fairy-tale as Tolkien saw it, and building its perimeter fence. We find Tolkien saying much
more what the fairy tale is not than what it is. On “escape,” for instance,
he tells us that the fairy tale gives us release from modernity, industrialism, poor taste in clothes, hunger, pain, poverty, injustice and death: that
is, he says much more about what the escape is from than about what it is
towards. He is not yet moving outwards, into his own territory.
As well as “escape,” it seems clear that Tolkien did in the lecture touch
on what he later called “Recovery” as one of the criteria of fairy-story,244
Book Reviews
but the Citizen reporter seems rather to have garbled what he said. However, since it is mentioned under the sub-heading “Origin of Fairy Stories,” it appears that Tolkien made this process of “renewal and return”
analogous to returning to the beginnings of fairy-stories themselves. This
is perhaps another way of saying that the fairy story should be of a traditional rather than a radically novel character. Moreover, Tolkien is not so
much talking about the reader doing this self-renewing as the fairy-story
itself. This makes the point about “recovery” more a literary drinking at
the springs of Helicon than a moral benefit to its audience. Here again
it would seem that the lecture was inward looking and literary-scholarly
in character.
The sense of enclosure seems continued in what Tolkien ends by saying about the “happy ending” of fairy story. He sees it as a mere literary
device, a frame to a picture, “no more to be the real end of the story than
the picture-frame was of the visionary scene or the window-casement of
the outer world” (169). It is only in his later thinking that Tolkien sees the
happy ending as an essential part of fairy story, no mere literary device
but an image of Truth itself. It would seem that in the lecture Tolkien
portrayed fairy-stories as diversions from reality rather than as giving us
a new and truer Reality.
The content of the lecture seems reflected in its somewhat apologetic
tone, whereby Tolkien starts by saying he is not a student of fairy stories
as Andrew Lang was, proceeds by declaring it is sometimes “dangerous
for him to ask too many questions [as a traveller in the land of fairy
story]” (165), and goes on to say he is at as disadvantage in not being a
Scotsman. This tone is more fully seen, as the editors of Tolkien On Fairystories remark, in the opening folios of Manuscript B, which are probably
the draft pages for the opening of the lecture taken from Manuscript A
(206ff).
From the report we have, it would seem that Tolkien’s lecture contained little reference to the association of children and fairy tales to
which he devoted much attention in the draft. Neither lecture nor draft
mention the categories Fantasy, Imagination and Enchantment as Tolkien was later to do, nor do they make any reference to Consolation, which
after Fantasy, Recovery and Escape was to be Tolkien’s fourth main criterion for a successful fairy-story. In particular the lecture does not touch
on that aspect of Consolation that Tolkien was later to endow with potential Christian power. Of course, part of this is down to the fact that
Tolkien is giving a lecture, which is usually no more than 7,000 words,
and things in his draft had to go. But it is also a question of what became
relevant. He was talking and arguing with Lang and other scholars, and
attacking the “realism” that rejects fairy-stories as escapist. Later he was
to become less an apologist for the genre and a more assured advocate245
Book Reviews
of it. This was partly because from now on he wrote rather than had to
lecture on it; but also because his writing of The Lord of the Rings gave him
increasing confidence in the truth of what he had said and in the literary
worth of fairy-stories themselves.
However, the lecture and its draft show how seriously Tolkien took
fairy-tales as literature. He is the first in British literature since George
MacDonald to do so, and the most prominent since the German Romantic writers and theorists of the Kunstmärchen (c.1790-1820). In doing
this he turns three assumptions on their heads, namely, that fairy tales
are about fairies, that they are for children and that the escapism at their
core is contemptible. In this one lecture we already have no mere scholar
arguing a dusty corner, but a major mind contributing new insights. And
those insights are going to guide what he writes afterwards.
Turning now to Manuscript B, we find the growth of the Tolkien’s
later ideas on fairy-story, which reached broadly final form by the end of
the war. It is here that he develops his ideas of Fantasy, Recovery, Escape,
Consolation and Evangelium, and here that he has much more to say
about the craft of making. Where the lecture and Manuscript A talk of
isolating the fairy-story as a genre, or of how its nature is changed by
continual additions over centuries, or of whether escapism in literature
is a good or bad thing, now we talk much more about the individual
human maker, struggling to make his materials come together into an
enchanted whole. While keeping all the theoretic material of the lecture,
Tolkien now becomes a little more practical. How do you make a fairystory? What sort of a story will it be? How will it affect people? What was
relatively introverted in the essay now works outwards, through Tolkien
to his audience.
And this is because, across the whole period of Manuscript B, Tolkien is struggling his way through the writing of The Lord of the Rings. He
once wrote to me, “The Lord of the Rings was a deliberate attempt to write
a large-scale adult fairy-story” (letter dated 8 February 1967). This may
well have grown to be the case, but it can hardly have been so from the
outset, when he had not yet formulated his criteria for a successful fairy
tale. But it is striking that he says that his fantasy was written to express
his theories: it suggests a degree of deliberateness in every choice that
goes far beyond mapping, dating or language-construction in imposing
coherence on the story. However, we should not take every statement
Tolkien makes absolutely at face value. After all, he once said that like his
other stories The Lord of the Rings was written simply to provide a context
for its invented languages (Letters 219).
We must not, I think, consider Manuscript B as the final stage of
Tolkien’s thinking for the essay. Much that we find in Manuscript A is
repeated, and topics treated there are dragged forth once more to be246
Book Reviews
gnawed over. If Tolkien called the fairy tale a soup of bits and pieces
picked up over the ages, bits and pieces is still what his essay remains in
Manuscript B: his own soup is still very far from the table. Sometimes the
thinking and the writing run clear, and we get passages that we shall see
again in the final version. But most of the material discusses once more
the topics of fairy-story origins and of children as their readers.
On fairy-story origins Tolkien is driven by his linguistic instinct for
source hunting. Despite his assertions that the importance of fairy-stories is in what they are now, and that he will only “lightly touch” on
the theme of origins, page after page canvasses the various mutations
of fairy-tales down the ages, their relation to myth, and whether their
origins are through independent creations of the same basic narratives
or transmission from a culture center.
On children Tolkien continually ties himself in knots with generalizations (for instance, that if children were uniquely suited to reading
fairy tales they would write only stories of that sort) or arguments based
merely on his own individual experience as a child. But of course, he
is often scribbling down stray thoughts, and we must not give them the
scrutiny we would apply to a settled essay. What is obvious is continued
obsession with this subject, and the reason is not far to seek. He is embarked on a fantasy for adults more than children, and he is not sure that
he will find a market.
When we consider all the material here, it is plain that the essay
“On Fairy-stories” came at no time to Tolkien as a unified literary programme. Each of the subjects—definition, origins, children, recovery, escape, loathing for modern civilization, is treated in isolation from the others. There is never any sense of any stream of thought running through
everything, nor does Tolkien make much attempt to join one area of
his thinking with another, so that the “origins” material is in a separate
box from that on “recovery” or “escape”. There is nothing necessarily
wrong with that—it is justifiable to proceed by an additive or “spectrum”
method of description: but what is worrying here is Tolkien’s ability to
contradict himself, and his habit of digressing from the point. Moreover
the way he continually returns to worry a subject suggests that even in
print we will not have his settled views.
It must be said that, so far does Manuscript B seem from an essay, it
is almost a miracle that Tolkien managed to bring everything together
for the Williams collection. He had of course the organisation forced on
him by the 1939 lecture, and to that he must have returned for his broad
outline. Into this outline he injected the quite new matter on dreams and
drama, on children and fairy-story, on “Elvish” and human fantasy, on
the nature of Fantasy, Imagination, Enchantment and Secondary Belief, and, most of all, and at considerable length, on four criteria of the247
Book Reviews
successful fairy-story—Fantasy, Recovery, Escape and Consolation. All
this would seem further to confuse the situation.
Instead, by some miracle or touch of the wand, it makes all the random lines turn straight. Tolkien’s idea of Fantasy as “the realisation,
independent of the conceiving mind, of imagined wonder” leads in
quite clear sequence to the notion of re-enchanting our perception of
the world through Recovery of a sense of the elemental “this-ness” of
things. From thence the idea of Escape from our industrial environment
to a primal unappropriated world was quite natural. Finally, Tolkien’s
fourth category of fairy-story, Consolation, concerning the various joys
that are offered through the “happy ending,” also follows clearly from the
topic of Escape.
Then we see that in fact all of Tolkien’s four new criteria, Fantasy,
Recovery, Escape and Consolation involve a return to beginnings, a stripping away of our blinkering experience. And that brings us back to the
material on the origins of the fairy-story, which now acquires a late and
unconscious relevance: to understand what the fairy story is you must go
backwards, and to understand what it does you must go backwards in
perception.
Now this leads us to the topic of children: while Tolkien denies that
they are fairy-stories’ true readership, he argues that all readers should
be child-like—that is aesthetically innocent, entirely open to them. And
thus, by indirections direction is found out: the essay, composed of a
series of aperçus, begins at as primal a level as that by which fairy-stories themselves operate, to come together like disjoined limbs coming
together to make a living body. It is the “realization, independent of the
conceiving mind, of imagined wonder” (35). To say the least it is remarkable, “a sudden and miraculous grace: never to be counted on to recur”
(75).
For the more general character of Tolkien’s views on the fairy tale,
however, it must be striking to any open-minded reader how much he is
arguing with Victorian rather than modern scholars of the genre, as if
nothing significant had been written about the fairy tale since the 1890s.
Not one word does he write about Sigmund Freud, who saw fairy tales
as emerging, like dreams, from the tangled undergrowth of the libido,
and whose views had transformed twentieth-century thought. Tolkien
thought that sex was something you really did not talk about, where
Freud believed that, directly or indirectly, you talked about nothing else.
For Freud as for Tolkien, fantasy was the true idiom of literature: but
where Freud sees fantasy as the new realism, Tolkien sees it as an escape
from reality.
This reminds us of just how much Tolkien’s thinking is an islanded
intellectual survival in his own time. More broadly it reminds us how248
Book Reviews
England managed to keep Victorian and Edwardian views the socially
dominant ones for forty years after the First World War. Tolkien’s thinking passes back through fantasy writers such as E.R. Eddison, John Masefield, Kenneth Morris, Lord Dunsany and Kenneth Grahame to William
Morris’s late romances and the nostalgic, pastoralist Georgian poets of
his childhood. It is there that he belongs, rather than with such writers of
his adult years as Eliot, Lawrence, Wyndham Lewis or Auden.
COLIN MANLOVE
EDINBURGH, SCOTLAND
Words, Phrases and Passages in Various Tongues in “The Lord of the Rings,” by
J.R.R. Tolkien, edited by Christopher Gilson. Mountain View, CA: Parma Eldalamberon, 2007. 220 pp. $35.00 (oversize paperback) [no ISBN].
Parma Edalamberon XVII.
Any reader of The Lord of the Rings who has jotted down lists of Elvish vocabulary and puzzled endlessly over the significance of unglossed
words and names such as Rhudaur, edraith and Tol Brandir will have dreamed
of a book in which all the words are laid out, all the riddles are answered
and—this being Tolkien—new vistas are opened up to delight the imagination. As a child of ten or twelve, I literally dreamed of stumbling across
such a volume in a bookshop, of opening its pages, and of glimpsing
those new vistas. Of course, as is the way with elfinesse, when I woke up
all the details were forgotten. But here at last, reassuringly solid, is that
book—a linguistic companion to The Lord of the Rings that should satisfy
for quite some time those who love Sindarin and Quenya.
Yet the book is certainly not as I dreamed: Tolkien envisaged it but
never finished it, and his shifting ideas on almost every detail produce a
palimpsest, a tangle of variants and downright contradictions. There is
not one text but many, yet they involve multiple passes through the same
material: the instances of invented language in The Lord of the Rings. There
is the impression of a mind swooping down to circle repeatedly around
particular points of grammar or meaning that troubled their creator,
from the meaning of Galadriel to the various forms of the Quenya first
person plural. Other points get the briefest flicker of attention, though to
many readers these, including a wealth of previously unpublished names,
will be of the greatest immediate interest.
In contrast with earlier issues of Parma Eldalamberon which have presented Tolkien’s work in Elvish from c. 1915 to the early 1930s, the texts
included here cover that most familiar phase of Tolkien’s creative career,
The Lord of the Rings as it was when complete. Thus, perhaps, most readers
will find these texts more immediately satisfying than the Qenya Lexicon248
Book Reviews
England managed to keep Victorian and Edwardian views the socially
dominant ones for forty years after the First World War. Tolkien’s thinking passes back through fantasy writers such as E.R. Eddison, John Masefield, Kenneth Morris, Lord Dunsany and Kenneth Grahame to William
Morris’s late romances and the nostalgic, pastoralist Georgian poets of
his childhood. It is there that he belongs, rather than with such writers of
his adult years as Eliot, Lawrence, Wyndham Lewis or Auden.
COLIN MANLOVE
EDINBURGH, SCOTLAND
Words, Phrases and Passages in Various Tongues in “The Lord of the Rings,” by
J.R.R. Tolkien, edited by Christopher Gilson. Mountain View, CA: Parma Eldalamberon, 2007. 220 pp. $35.00 (oversize paperback) [no ISBN].
Parma Edalamberon XVII.
Any reader of The Lord of the Rings who has jotted down lists of Elvish vocabulary and puzzled endlessly over the significance of unglossed
words and names such as Rhudaur, edraith and Tol Brandir will have dreamed
of a book in which all the words are laid out, all the riddles are answered
and—this being Tolkien—new vistas are opened up to delight the imagination. As a child of ten or twelve, I literally dreamed of stumbling across
such a volume in a bookshop, of opening its pages, and of glimpsing
those new vistas. Of course, as is the way with elfinesse, when I woke up
all the details were forgotten. But here at last, reassuringly solid, is that
book—a linguistic companion to The Lord of the Rings that should satisfy
for quite some time those who love Sindarin and Quenya.
Yet the book is certainly not as I dreamed: Tolkien envisaged it but
never finished it, and his shifting ideas on almost every detail produce a
palimpsest, a tangle of variants and downright contradictions. There is
not one text but many, yet they involve multiple passes through the same
material: the instances of invented language in The Lord of the Rings. There
is the impression of a mind swooping down to circle repeatedly around
particular points of grammar or meaning that troubled their creator,
from the meaning of Galadriel to the various forms of the Quenya first
person plural. Other points get the briefest flicker of attention, though to
many readers these, including a wealth of previously unpublished names,
will be of the greatest immediate interest.
In contrast with earlier issues of Parma Eldalamberon which have presented Tolkien’s work in Elvish from c. 1915 to the early 1930s, the texts
included here cover that most familiar phase of Tolkien’s creative career,
The Lord of the Rings as it was when complete. Thus, perhaps, most readers
will find these texts more immediately satisfying than the Qenya Lexicon249
Book Reviews
which Tolkien compiled as an undergraduate and soldier in the First
World War, or the grammars of Noldorin he wrote in the 1920s, or even
“The Etymologies” published in The Lost Road. The territory surveyed is
engagingly familiar. The dusty excavation seen in editions of these earlier
linguistic papers has given way to the study of forms that are given vivid
life in Tolkien’s greatest literary work.
Perusing those notes is like meeting old friends again, and getting
to know them more closely than ever. Those who love only the sense of
mystery produced by an untranslated phrase in The Lord of the Rings such
as “naur an edraith ammen” should steer well clear; yet even for the
keenest lambendil there will be new mysteries open up here: for example,
Arvernien is translated as “the land beside the Verna,” but nowhere are we
told what the Verna is.
It is fascinating to see Lúthien translated here as “daughter of flower,”
suggesting that the proposal in 1977’s An Introduction to Elvish that Luthien
Tinuviel was intended to evoke “Florence Nightingale” may have been
near the mark. We are also told the Quenya name for Barad-dûr and
the Dwarvish original for Nargothrond; the river-name Narog, too, is derived from the Dwarven language Khuzdul. Among many others, Asfaloth, Nûrnen, lebethron and Orodreth are explained at last, as is the final element in the place-names Eregion and Sirion. The explanation of Dol Baran
proves that even the most apparently transparent Sindarin name may
have more than meets the eye: it does not, after all, contain the element
baran “golden-brown” seen in Baranduin. It is a surprise to learn that the
first elements in Druadan and Rhovanion are etymologically related. The
regional name Rhudaur has long proved opaque; yet now it is revealed as
none other than the Sindarin for “Trollshaw,” which has always appeared
right next to it on the Lord of the Rings map: the solution was staring us in
the face all along. On the other hand, since the materials presented are
sometimes little more than jottings, there are frustrations: the glosses on
huorn are tantalisingly illegible.
Perhaps most interesting of all for this reader is the translation of
Sauron’s bynames Thû and Gorthu as “horrible darkness, black mist” and
“Mist of Fear” respectively, with a related root THUS meaning “evil
mist, fog, Darkness.” The ideas anchor him in the primal night represented in The Book of Lost Tales by Ungweliantë the spider; in the Black
Breath of his Nazgûl, the fog of the Barrow-downs, the grey mist of fear
that flows from the Paths of the Dead and brings Gimli to his terrified
knees; and ultimately, I suspect, to Tolkien’s experience of smoke barrages, gas attacks and “animal horror” on the Somme.
Much of the value of these papers lies not in strictly linguistic items
of vocabulary, grammar, phonology or morphology, but in their broader
philological aspects. There is, for example, an excellent summary of the250
Book Reviews
influence of Finnish and Welsh on Quenya and Sindarin respectively;
how that influence changed as Tolkien refined his languages; and how
Sindarin differs from Quenya as Welsh differs from Latin. There is also
much on the dialects of Sindarin in Beleriand, predicated on (and sometimes contributing to) Tolkien’s complex historical view of the era.
Subtle are the ways of philologists, and Tolkien was certainly no exception. He coined a Quenya equivalent for Gilthoniel, then deleted it, presumably because there was no warrant for one historically (it was Varda’s
name among the exiles, who spoke Sindarin not Quenya). One note lists
the linguistic indications that Galadriel’s lament, “Namarië,” is in a specifically Third-Age form of Quenya. A statement that the Sindarin vision-word fân “being elvish . . . has no implication either of uncertainty
or unreality” is best understood by reading “On Fairy-stories.”
Tolkien particularly seems to hate just concocting a new root to explain a word already invented by now found to be somehow problematic,
as when he coins then rejects WOR “exude” as an element in miruvor. On
the other hand he is content to create new derivatives of existing roots,
e.g. mbassē beside mbasta from MBAS (52).
The introduction shows that Tolkien sometimes consciously wrote or
revised his fiction as a direct “consequence of thinking about the points
raised” by an analysis of linguistic elements. His thoughts were exercised
in particular by the inconsistencies which had inevitably arisen during
the long and hugely complex development of The Lord of the Rings. Work
on these points led to him doing “a great deal of work” on “The Silmarillion,” as he said (perhaps a little defensively) to Rayner Unwin in
February 1960. Any anxieties the publisher might have felt were justified,
however. The catalyst for this burst of work was a fan’s compilation of
words and names in The Lord of the Rings—the kind of letter that must
have seriously distracted Tolkien from direct composition on “The Silmarillion” in his last two decades.
In Tolkien’s niggling with languages the potential for distraction was
infinite. By the time The Lord of the Rings was published, the grammar and
morphology of Quenya and Sindarin were sufficiently well developed
(in fact had been so since his earliest lexicons of c. 1915 and c. 1917
respectively) to allow alternative explanations for many words: for example, omentië is derived from either a gerund omentië “meeting” (with verbal
ending –ië) or a noun compound “meeting of pathways” (where the final
element is the noun tië “path”) (13).
All in all, his notes constitute a rich mine indeed, whether you are
interested in vocabulary alone, or grammar, phonology and morphology, or you want more data on Middle-earth, or wish to see how Tolkien uses philology to deepen his creation (as in the entry on fân- which
becomes a mini-essay, 173-80; or that on sule, 124-5). There is probably251
Book Reviews
more fresh information on Sindarin in this publication than anywhere
else. Snippets from letters otherwise unpublished enrich the stew, such as
the one in which Tolkien describes how “the ‘languages’ have, of course,
changed . . . hardening at last with age.” (40)—though a reconsideration
of the meaning of Noldo suggests the hardening was never actually a sure
thing.
Aragorn is given a slightly different interpretation from the one provided in The Peoples of Middle-earth; the explanation of Nimrodel precedes
the version furnished in Unfinished Tales; and Gilraen is translated quite
differently here from the gloss seen in Vinyar Tengwar 42. Occasionally
Tolkien sees the existence of two possible explanations for one form as an
artistic boon—a pun—rather than a problem; for example when he derives Fanuilos, Elbereth’s byname, from fanui “cloudy” and los “snow” on
one hand and from fân “white” and Uilos, the Sindarin name of Mount
Oiolossë in Valinor.
For those seeking to write in Sindarin or Quenya, there are complete present tense paradigms for two verbs (“make” and “grow”) in each
language, plus possessive pronoun suffixes for Quenya. But on page 57,
one of these verb paradigms appears for Quenya in a different form,
with many divergences. Even at this late stage, Tolkien had not settled on
questions he had started answering in the 1920s or even earlier.
The compilation gives the lie to the idea that Tolkien’s invented languages became immutable and orderly once The Lord of the Rings had
been completed. His delight was still in finding new or improved words,
forms, derivations and grammatical patterns, so even if the forms in The
Lord of the Rings were fixed he now found multiple ways to explain many
of them. And in some cases he was even prepared to alter those that had
already appeared in print, having found them aesthetically inferior or in
some way technically flawed.
A further realization, adumbrated in The History of Middle-earth but
acutely clear here, is that Tolkien’s conceptions shifted both generally
and in detail while he was writing and revising The Lord of the Rings for its
first publication—an eighteen-year process almost as long as the lifespan
of his two chief Elvish tongues prior to The Lord of the Rings. He now
found inconsistencies everywhere, presumably because at any given time
he had either been attending more closely to the narrative than the language and nomenclature, and so had been careless; or (more likely) he
had held a view at the time of writing which he had since left behind.
One thing that these notes do not tell you is what Tolkien intended when
he first coined most of the material in the process of writing The Lord of
the Rings. His interpretations are a retrospective examination of items he
now saw as exposed to public view and therefore requiring justification
or polish.252
Book Reviews
Tolkien’s purpose is often to reconsider the linguistic bases of elements in “The Silmarillion”—the names of the sons of Finwë, the
nomenclature of the Elven diaspora—to make his mythological work
ready for public consumption. He is often willing to contemplate major
changes—he hates the names Fingon and Felagund and finds many others
wanting, deciding at one point to alter Glaurung to Angruin (but never carrying this through). Yet this dislike of old forms is hardly surprising: these
names had been coined, in some cases, in the 1920s or earlier. They no
longer reflected his ideas about his invented languages, technically or
aesthetically.
However, there are hints of a more seismic shift, already seen in Morgoth’s Ring in relation to narrative. The Book of Lost Tales had inhabited the
realm of the fabulous, but now Tolkien wanted to appeal more strongly
to realism and internal consistency. Noldo was now reconsidered to mean
“dark-haired” rather than “wise” because he felt the second kindred
would have been named before their cultural or spiritual tendencies had
become a fixed idea. This prosaic later notion was surely not an improvement on the simpler, emblematic original.
A key passage from a letter quoted herein helps to underline the problem. It sets out Tolkien’s two principal purposes in inventing languages:
firstly, as the best means of differentiating peoples in a story “without ‘lecturing’” by introducing massive cultural detail; and secondly, as a pleasure in themselves, separate from the story. For the first purpose, complete
lexicons and other data are actually an impediment, he admits—because
they increase the degree of “lecturing” and threaten to overwhelm the
story. But for the second purpose they are highly desirable.
After witnessing at length the first decade or so of Tolkien’s fiftyeight-year love affair with his “Middle-earth” languages—a period when
he had little or no audience—we see the activity he had dubbed his “secret vice” finally exposed to the public; and we sense his overwhelming
relief and pleasure at discovering that other people were interested, even
fascinated and delighted by these tongues. I suspect this revelation that
his vice need no longer remain a secret was a catalyst in his failure to
achieve publication in any form of “The Silmarillion.” Now he had even
more excuses to focus on perfecting the languages (purpose no. 2) at the
expense of pursuing the stories which they served (purpose no. 1). In
ways which his readers would recognize and deprecate even if Tolkien
himself did not, the brain was taking over from the heart.
The notes often consist of simple declarative statements, where Tolkien is sure of his ground and especially when dealing with Quenya. He
also frequently writes not as inventor but as student, calling the Black
Speech “evidently an agglutinative language” with a verbal system which
“must have included pronominal suffixes expressing the object, as well as253
Book Reviews
those indicating the subject” (10-11; my emphases). Yet at other times
Tolkien writes openly as author, confessing his creative thinking, his dilemmas and doubts, and even his disappointments with his own work.
We see Tolkien’s sense of phonaesthetics determining the choice of
forms—there can be no other explanation for his rejection of the root
DEL “thick, dense” as a component of the name Glorfindel because “it
does not provide suitable Quenya or Sindarin forms.” One may or may
not agree that the ephemeral forms delch “dense,” delw “thick,” or Quenya counterparts lelya, nelta, delta, delya are not “suitable”; it is a matter of
taste—one may guess that Tolkien would have preferred the root vowel
to be pronounced further back in the mouth (o, u) rather than at the front
like e to indicate the sense of denseness. And indeed, in the root index
we see lelya as a Quenya word for “lovely, beautiful” under root DEL or
“fine, beautiful” under root DĔL (151).
The reason why Tolkien revised omentielmo > omentielvo in the second
edition is revealed—that the m here and in met in Galadriel’s lament must
derive from the same origin, yet the former is inclusive (“our,” i.e. “yours
and mine”) while the latter (“us two,” i.e “me and a third party, but not
you”) is exclusive. Tolkien worked with typical industry and ingenuity to
resolve this, but his solutions created further disturbances in the wider
grammatical system—so he then decided that Frodo had simply made
a mistake. Thus pedantry defeats romance. Tolkien was frustrated with
himself, dismissing his efforts as “all this to-do” (130). Yet the second
edition allowed him freedom to smooth over the cracks, altering Frodo’s
word to omentielvo, along with introducing other changes to meet his highly self-critical standards. Illuminating these processes, a deft introduction
by editor Christopher Gilson makes good use of the just-published J.R.R.
Tolkien: A Companion and Guide.
The backbone of Parma Eldalamberon 17 is Tolkien’s commentary,
“Words, Phrases and Passages,” abandoned when he reached Lórien.
But Gilson has also taken the opportunity to publish numerous linguistic
lists, notes, letter and mini-essays, all (very) roughly contemporary. Coverage of the songs “A Elbereth Gilthoniel” and “Namárie” means that
there is significant overlap with Tolkien’s linguistic appendix to Donald
Swann’s The Road Goes Ever On (1967); and there is also a great deal of
material already seen in alternative versions in his guide for translators
as published in Jared Lobdell’s A Tolkien Compass (1975) and Wayne G.
Hammond and Christina Scull’s The Lord of the Rings: A Reader’s Companion
(2005)—especially as drafts of these are included, discussing Dutch and
Swedish translations of Isengard and Isenmouthe (32-33).
From multiple options for presentation, Gilson has chosen one that
is more practical than purist. Rather than presenting each note or text
or sheaf as a separate whole (arranged, for example, chronologically),254
Book Reviews
he has organised all these items into two large sections. Firstly, there is a
comprehensive word-list such as Tolkien had planned—a single analytical commentary that is notionally a fuller form of “Words, Phrases and
Passages.” Secondly, various etymological notes under root-headings are
presented as an appendix, into which, usefully, the editors interpolate a
list of all roots mentioned elsewhere in these texts, to form an index. This
means Parma Eldalamberon 17 functions as a linguistic companion to The
Lord of the Rings (complementing The Lord of the Rings: A Reader’s Companion)
and as a “sequel” to “The Etymologies” of the late 1930s. Additionally,
Gilson provides an index of glosses, organised by language.
The sheer volume of information here precludes the kind of wideranging editorial cross-references and analysis seen in previous issue of
Parma Eldalamberon and its sister publication Vinyar Tengwar. Full commentary and references would have swelled this volume to at least three times
its length, as may be seen by comparing the treatment of a list of Elvish
words for modes of thought here with the much more discursive analysis
of the same fragment in Vinyar Tengwar 41; or the terse presentation of
notes on Lhûn and -ló (Ringló, Gwathló) here with the full discussion seen
in Vinyar Tengwar 48, “The Problem of Lhûn.” The disquisition on words
for “and,” as well as Tolkien’s lengthy notes on comparatives, would certainly have benefited from Vinyar Tengwar-style commentary. Doubtless
some notes will indeed receive more comment and analysis in later issues
of Parma Eldalamberon or Vinyar Tengwar when relevant to new material.
But within this publication the apparatus is mostly functional, restricted to major cross-references and bibliographical description. Where
Tolkien fails to translate a word, the editor usually leaves it unglossed.
Where Tolkien revisits a concept and revises his ideas, there is little or
no discussion of the changes he makes. Though all dating information
is provided, there is no real attempt to put entries in chronological sequence to show the development of his thought. It all demands a great
deal of the reader. But on the other hand it provides much scope for
inquiry and analysis by those who wish to work on Elvish: what does
each untranslated word mean; what does this or that form indicate about
grammar or phonology?
The cross-references and indexes are rendered less useful due to the
reference system used: not by page within this issue, but by page references to The Lord of the Rings, which stand at the head of each entry or series of entries. These page references are small, indented, and spaced as
if they belong to the entries preceding, not those following. Though some
entries span many pages, there are no headwords to help readers find
their place. There is no index of unglossed forms, and none by gloss. A
few apparent typographical errors appear, and readers would be advised
to check the errata published periodically online at <www.elvish.org>.255
Book Reviews
None of this should detract from the considerable achievement of
bringing such intractable materials to light. And these notes will no doubt
increase in value, and become easier to understand, when Parma Eldalamberon’s chronological coverage of Tolkien’s language invention reaches to
the 1950s and 1960s—though to judge by the volume and complexity of
the material published so far, that must still be a long way off.
JOHN GARTH
LONDON, ENGLAND
Arda Reconstructed: The Creation of the Published “Silmarillion,” by Douglas
Charles Kane. Bethlehem, Pennsylvania: Lehigh University Press, 2009.
280 pp. $65.00. ISBN 9780980149630.
Douglas Charles Kane’s diligently researched book takes the reader
through the process behind an earlier diligent effort, that of Christopher
Tolkien (assisted by Guy Gavriel Kay) in editing the 1977 Silmarillion.
Kane minutely details the delicate task Christopher undertook in stitching together elements of his father’s oeuvre, disparate in genre (from
annals and glossaries to full-fledged narratives) and in composition-date
(from the 1930s to the 1960s, including work composed both before and
after The Lord of the Rings).
Kane goes through all of The Silmarillion, beginning with the “Ainulindalë” and proceeding on until the end of the “Quenta Silmarillion,”
with the final defeat of Morgoth by Eonwë (the “Akallabêth” and, especially, “Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age,” are less extensively
treated, as Kane deems there to be fewer textual questions). In each chapter, Kane details exactly what sources Christopher used and the truly astonishing inventiveness he showed in assembling them into a steady narrative. He also supplies extensive charts and tables detailing the editorial
process in a blow-by-blow way. This graphic element lends clarity and
organization to what might otherwise be an overwhelming amount of
detail. Finally, the potential dryness is relieved by absorbing illustrations
supplied by Anushka Mouriño; these, more realistic in terms of human
portraiture than most Tolkien-inspired art, subtly fortify Kane’s tacit argument that the “Silmarillion” material has more moments of gripping
interpersonal drama than the published version revealed. Mouriño’s depiction of the spirit of Míriel appearing before Mandos and Manwë has
a Pre-Raphaelite lushness, and also embodies Kane’s point that Christopher’s recension excessively cropped back Míriel’s role.
One of the questions Kane’s study puts to rest totally is the old conjecture about whether The Silmarillion is all Tolkien’s work. Other than a
very few instances (such as tying the Nauglamir more closely to Thingol255
Book Reviews
None of this should detract from the considerable achievement of
bringing such intractable materials to light. And these notes will no doubt
increase in value, and become easier to understand, when Parma Eldalamberon’s chronological coverage of Tolkien’s language invention reaches to
the 1950s and 1960s—though to judge by the volume and complexity of
the material published so far, that must still be a long way off.
JOHN GARTH
LONDON, ENGLAND
Arda Reconstructed: The Creation of the Published “Silmarillion,” by Douglas
Charles Kane. Bethlehem, Pennsylvania: Lehigh University Press, 2009.
280 pp. $65.00. ISBN 9780980149630.
Douglas Charles Kane’s diligently researched book takes the reader
through the process behind an earlier diligent effort, that of Christopher
Tolkien (assisted by Guy Gavriel Kay) in editing the 1977 Silmarillion.
Kane minutely details the delicate task Christopher undertook in stitching together elements of his father’s oeuvre, disparate in genre (from
annals and glossaries to full-fledged narratives) and in composition-date
(from the 1930s to the 1960s, including work composed both before and
after The Lord of the Rings).
Kane goes through all of The Silmarillion, beginning with the “Ainulindalë” and proceeding on until the end of the “Quenta Silmarillion,”
with the final defeat of Morgoth by Eonwë (the “Akallabêth” and, especially, “Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age,” are less extensively
treated, as Kane deems there to be fewer textual questions). In each chapter, Kane details exactly what sources Christopher used and the truly astonishing inventiveness he showed in assembling them into a steady narrative. He also supplies extensive charts and tables detailing the editorial
process in a blow-by-blow way. This graphic element lends clarity and
organization to what might otherwise be an overwhelming amount of
detail. Finally, the potential dryness is relieved by absorbing illustrations
supplied by Anushka Mouriño; these, more realistic in terms of human
portraiture than most Tolkien-inspired art, subtly fortify Kane’s tacit argument that the “Silmarillion” material has more moments of gripping
interpersonal drama than the published version revealed. Mouriño’s depiction of the spirit of Míriel appearing before Mandos and Manwë has
a Pre-Raphaelite lushness, and also embodies Kane’s point that Christopher’s recension excessively cropped back Míriel’s role.
One of the questions Kane’s study puts to rest totally is the old conjecture about whether The Silmarillion is all Tolkien’s work. Other than a
very few instances (such as tying the Nauglamir more closely to Thingol256
Book Reviews
in “The Ruin of Doriath”) no significant line in the book was “written
by the editor” (24). Kane’s well-known online epithet, “Voronwë,” is
very suitable for his execution of this task, as watchful and respectful as
Mardil the Good Steward’s rule no doubt was in the wake of the disappearance of King Eärnur. Kane’s textual scholarship is rigorous and is
a model not only for Tolkien scholars but for scholars of more canonical authors, whose textual study is often pursued with less enthusiasm.
Where Kane’s treatment is less complete is in his own evaluation of the
merits of Christopher’s editing and editorial choices. Kane makes some
very good points, and convinces the reader there was good material in
the sources available to Christopher that he did not sufficiently deploy.
Although acknowledging that The Silmarillion choices were motivated by
“the most coherent and literary text possible” (26), Kane often gives short
shrift to the ways in which these choices were motivated by purposeful
literary intent.
In assessing the “Valaquenta,” for instance, Kane notes (40) that
Christopher Tolkien changed “With Manwë now dwells Varda” to “With
Manwë dwells Varda.” The deletion of the “now,” though, is understood when one realizes the genre to which the “Valaquenta” belongs,
a mythography of a tradition long passed on but now very remote. The
final redactors (within the Middle-earth framework) of the “Silmarillion”
material would have a sense of the existence of the Valar, but not so
much their current existence in the same temporal moment; what we
have now seems somewhat like an account of the Olympian gods by a
writer such as Hesiod who believed in them but had no firsthand experience of their might, and such a tone is appropriate for the distance of the
“Valaquenta” from its material (one assumes its ultimate source is from
lore passed on through the returning Noldor in Beleriand).
Many of Christopher Tolkien’s choices can be explained thus, in literary terms. Kane wonders why the Ents are spliced into the Aulë and
Yavanna chapter, and he notes that it is most likely to give “some explanation of the Ents” (55). But Kane does not mention the overall context
of both editor and author himself needing to suture a First Age narrative, not originally designed with The Lord of the Rings in mind, into being
a background work to a novel set in the Third Age that is effectively its
sequel. Much of the “Silmarillion” was fixed in print by The Lord of the
Rings in ways that could not be altered. “Inglor” Felagund could be handily changed to “Finrod” in the 1966 revision of The Lord of the Rings. But,
though Tolkien, according to Kane, considered making Galadriel Finrod’s daughter, this revision would have given her a degree of closeness
to the Beren-Lúthien story that is neither implied or evinced in The Lord
of the Rings, and perhaps for this reason it was not made. Furthermore,
roughly the first half of The Lord of the Rings was composed with only a257
Book Reviews
vague sense of its relation to the First Age mythos; only later on did the
historical world of Frodo and company become identifiable as a later
phase of that of the First Age Eldar. For instance, it is clear that when
mention is first made of Gil-galad, Tolkien was looking for the general
resonance of a past Elven-king, not assigning him an assured place in a
Noldorin genealogy in which he had not been mentioned before—because Tolkien had not yet invented him. The question that Merry asks
of Aragorn, “Who is Gil-galad?” (FR, I, xi, 197) was no doubt one, on
a meta-level, Tolkien was asking himself! As Kane shows, Tolkien never
quite answered it. Aragorn’s turn to the story of Beren and Lúthien was
thus not just to a tale that avoided Mordor but to a tale, unlike that of
Gil-galad, whose full scope the author composing the text already knew.
Gil-galad’s ancestry is never made determinate. Even as late as the “Tale
of Aldarion and Erendis,” when Gil-galad identifies himself in his correspondence with Meneldur of Númenor as “Ereinion Gil-galad, son of
Fingon,” neither Gil-galad’s paternity nor his proper name are decisively
firm. The “final” product in Unfinished Tales is solely an outcome of a
judgment made by Christopher Tolkien.
The overall thread here, which Kane understands but about which
he could be much more articulate, is that Tolkien and later Christopher
Tolkien were revising and re-presenting the “Silmarillion” to an audience
used to The Lord of the Rings, that liked The Lord of the Rings, and one which
wanted The Silmarillion to fit conveniently into the world of The Lord of the
Rings. In the initial years after the quest of the Ring was introduced to
the reading public, Tolkien was tempted to make “fundamental changes”
(122) to the “Silmarillion.” For instance, he considered eliminating what
Kane rightly sees as a winning feature of the earlier mythos: the Sun
and Moon as later, contingent creations from the fruit of the slain Trees,
rather than being astronomically primary. Tolkien himself, then later
Christopher, wisely retrenched from this wholesale re-conception. But in
many less obvious ways—due to the need to insert such later-conceived
characters as Galadriel, Gil-galad, and Gandalf back into primeval history—the earlier material not only had to be made generally unified and
comprehensible but this had to be done in such a way that would reassure The Lord of the Rings readers looking for particular characters, and
also in a general sense keep Middle-earth congruent with the knowledge
they already had of it.
We now have had thirty years to absorb The Silmarillion. To us Maglor and Orodreth may be as familiar as a pint of good ale at The Green
Dragon. But this was not the case for the 1977 readers, and Christopher
Tolkien was laboring to produce a text that would satisfy the simultaneous desires of those readers for something new from Tolkien as well as
for something anchored in the Tolkien they already knew. On the other258
Book Reviews
side, doubling or repetition had to be avoided. Kane notes an instance
where a description of Nerdanel’s voice as “deeper than woman’s wont”
is deleted because the same was said in The Lord of the Rings of Galadriel’s
speech-tones (FR, II, vii, 370). Kane also notes (91) the deletion of the
characterization by Fëanor of Melkor as “gangrel,” and I would add
here that this deletion most likely occurred because Frodo describes Gollum as a “wretched gangrel creature” (TT, IV, iv, 266). Gollum and Morgoth were similarly evil, but on vastly different scales and depths, and the
doubling of the word would have been unadvisable. Other changes, on
the part of both Tolkien and his son, seem prompted by external considerations. The elimination of the children of the Valar (which made
Fionwë, the son of Manwë, become Eonwë, the herald of Manwë, and
which accounted for the famously foreshortened ending of the First Age)
surely has to do with not wanting to rival Christian ideas of the incarnation of the Son of God. Similarly, the shift Kane chronicles in the location of Hildórien probably has to do with Tolkien not wanting the land
of man’s origin equated with a discernible point on our own Eurasian
land mass. Underlying all this suturing, shifting, and substitution was a
need to make The Silmarillion readable and as tightly knit a unit as the
truly heterogeneous nature of the material could yield.
Though a broader compositional perspective is thus only lurking in
Kane’s analysis, at times he makes his own views explicit. Kane notices
that revisions in The Silmarillion consistently “lessened the female presence” (83) in the stories, especially lamentable given the common complaint that Tolkien generally under-represented women. This is particularly true, argues Kane, of the women in Fëanor’s life: both his mother,
Míriel, and his wife, Nerdanel, have unconventional and tragic life stories
which get short shrift in the 1977 version as compared to what could have
been pieced together with the resources at hand. Kane is on to something
here, and this cannot be explained away by merely compositional rationales. Yet The Silmarillion already has far more to do with gender relations
than The Lord of the Rings; even the happier of the two full-fledged great
tales, that of Beren and Lúthien, is full of untold suffering amid the glory
of a great love. The material Tolkien added latest to the “Silmarillion”
cycle, such as the story of Maeglin, his ill-starred mother, Aredhel ArFeiniel, and her marriage “beneath herself ” to a Dark Elf, is one of a
series of Tolkien’s late tales about the complicated relationships between
men and women (for example, Aldarion and Erendis, even Celeborn and
Galadriel). It adds tremendously to the emotional depth and moral realism of The Silmarillion. Kane’s suggestions that expanded roles for the
Fëanorian ladies would have amplified this strength are well argued.
As welcome as the scrupulous registering of minute changes is, the
book excels most when it points to these larger choices. The discussion259
Book Reviews
of Fëanor’s career is especially revelatory; we learn that it is originally
not Maedhros but his father Fëanor, who reports on the death of Finwë.
This leads to the provocative conclusion that in The Silmarillion the sons
of Fëanor, especially the two eldest, are tragic antiheroes as much as their
father is. Indeed, in The Silmarillion we see little of Fëanor, despite the extravagant praise Gandalf gives Feanor’s art (TT, III, xi, 204), leaving the
1977 reader who knew only The Lord of the Rings but not yet the History of
Middle-earth material somewhat caught short. Similarly, compositional
issues—especially Tolkien never having completed his retelling of the fall
of Gondolin, the beginning of which appears in Unfinished Tales—led to
Gondolin not being nearly as vividly rendered in The Silmarillion as the
less fabled Nargothrond. Kane points this out, as well as the foreshortening of the story of Eärendil, surely one of the pivotal moments in the history of Middle-earth, but given only one or two degrees more space than
the abbreviated defeat of Morgoth by Eonwë. As reiterated by Kristine
Larsen in her important talk, “Sea Birds and Morning Stars: Ceyx, Alcyone, and the Many Metamorphoses of Eärendil and Elwing” (delivered
at the 2008 Mythopoeic Society conference in Connecticut), the story of
Eärendil is a moving and bittersweet tale whose power, in The Silmarillion,
is seen only in flashes—certainly, the Mariner’s arrival in the Undying
Lands is one—of its conceivable power and scope. The under-representation of both Gondolin and Eärendil means that the Beren narrative is,
along with the more sorrowful tale of the Children of Húrin, the centerpiece of the “Quenta Silmarillion” in a way it otherwise would not have
been. Perhaps in a sense Tolkien would not have been displeased, given
how important this story was to him personally.
Many of Kane’s criticisms fall into the genre of Monday-morning
quarterbacking; the reason he is able to make them is because we have
reams of posthumously-published Tolkien material, and the reason we
have these reams is that The Silmarillion, as edited by Christopher Tolkien, was commercially successful enough to spur publication of all the
rest. Pertinent here is the well-known T. S. Eliot quote, “Some one said:
‘The dead writers are remote from us because we know so much more
than they did.’ Precisely, and they are that which we know.” We know
more than Christopher Tolkien did when he compiled The Silmarillion
because he compiled The Silmarillion in the way he did, and the book sold
enough copies for the publisher to present the later, more archival material in The History of Middle-earth. The Silmarillion had to pilot Tolkien
through the beginning of his nachleben, and indeed it partially guaranteed that there was one at all. Though I share Kane’s high valuation
of “Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth”—a lyrical, philosophical meditation
that embodies Tolkien’s depth and craftsmanship at their finest—one can
see how the inclusion of this, as well as the speculation concerning the260
Book Reviews
second prophecy of Mandos and Morgoth’s final defeat at the end-time,
would have imbalanced the tableau. The Silmarillion was published in
1977 in a way that plausibly could have been Bilbo Baggins’s translations
from the Elvish, for readers who would be as attuned to hobbit expectations of the Elder Days as was Bilbo himself. Kane points to this when,
in his otherwise sketchy discussion of the “Akallabêth,” he demonstrates
that Christopher Tolkien took out those aspects of the tale which depended on it being told by Pengoloð, the external narrative focalizer in
the “Silmarillion”-era tales before the Baggins-manuscript frame became
available. This emphasis on what the hobbit-reader would have found
as reassuring possibly explains the curtailment of the philosophical and
religious aspects of The Silmarillion. It also gives a rationale for the excision of some more psychologically probing details in what was already,
compared to the Tolkien writings that had been published previously, a
far more somber set of narratives.
The year The Silmarillion was published was the year the first Star Wars
movie came out. (Kane amusingly connects the two universes when he
compares [79] the inversions in Míriel’s speech to those of Yoda). In both
universes, the prequels (in Tolkien’s case, of course, originally conceived
far earlier), The Silmarillion and the late 1990s-early 2000s Star Wars films,
had the difficult task of maintaining narrative continuity while dealing
with far darker subject matter. Kane’s absorbing study shows that Christopher made choices the reader might regret. But he generated a published text that paved the way for the continuing posthumous growth of
Tolkien’s reputation.
NICHOLAS BIRNS
EUGENE LANG COLLEGE, THE NEW SCHOOL
NEW YORK, NEW YORK
Chesterton and Tolkien as Theologians: The Fantasy of the Real, by Alison Milbank. London and New York: T&T Clark, 2009. xvi, 184 pp. £19.99 /
$39.95 (trade paperback) ISBN 9780567390417.
A convincing argument may be made that the early twenty-first century is a new golden age of Tolkien criticism. Along with recent and
noteworthy works by long-established masters of Tolkien scholarship,
outstanding book-length studies by “new” writers like John Garth, John
D. Rateliff, and Diana Pavlac Glyer have swelled the Middle-earth scholar’s bookshelves with more absolutely essential tomes.
To the forefront of that honor roll, add Alison Milbank’s magnificent Chesterton and Tolkien as Theologians, first published in hardcover in
late 2007 (ISBN 9780567040947) and now released in trade paperback.260
Book Reviews
second prophecy of Mandos and Morgoth’s final defeat at the end-time,
would have imbalanced the tableau. The Silmarillion was published in
1977 in a way that plausibly could have been Bilbo Baggins’s translations
from the Elvish, for readers who would be as attuned to hobbit expectations of the Elder Days as was Bilbo himself. Kane points to this when,
in his otherwise sketchy discussion of the “Akallabêth,” he demonstrates
that Christopher Tolkien took out those aspects of the tale which depended on it being told by Pengoloð, the external narrative focalizer in
the “Silmarillion”-era tales before the Baggins-manuscript frame became
available. This emphasis on what the hobbit-reader would have found
as reassuring possibly explains the curtailment of the philosophical and
religious aspects of The Silmarillion. It also gives a rationale for the excision of some more psychologically probing details in what was already,
compared to the Tolkien writings that had been published previously, a
far more somber set of narratives.
The year The Silmarillion was published was the year the first Star Wars
movie came out. (Kane amusingly connects the two universes when he
compares [79] the inversions in Míriel’s speech to those of Yoda). In both
universes, the prequels (in Tolkien’s case, of course, originally conceived
far earlier), The Silmarillion and the late 1990s-early 2000s Star Wars films,
had the difficult task of maintaining narrative continuity while dealing
with far darker subject matter. Kane’s absorbing study shows that Christopher made choices the reader might regret. But he generated a published text that paved the way for the continuing posthumous growth of
Tolkien’s reputation.
NICHOLAS BIRNS
EUGENE LANG COLLEGE, THE NEW SCHOOL
NEW YORK, NEW YORK
Chesterton and Tolkien as Theologians: The Fantasy of the Real, by Alison Milbank. London and New York: T&T Clark, 2009. xvi, 184 pp. £19.99 /
$39.95 (trade paperback) ISBN 9780567390417.
A convincing argument may be made that the early twenty-first century is a new golden age of Tolkien criticism. Along with recent and
noteworthy works by long-established masters of Tolkien scholarship,
outstanding book-length studies by “new” writers like John Garth, John
D. Rateliff, and Diana Pavlac Glyer have swelled the Middle-earth scholar’s bookshelves with more absolutely essential tomes.
To the forefront of that honor roll, add Alison Milbank’s magnificent Chesterton and Tolkien as Theologians, first published in hardcover in
late 2007 (ISBN 9780567040947) and now released in trade paperback.261
Book Reviews
Prodigious and polymathic in its allusions to fiction, folklore, theology,
philosophy, economics, papal encyclicals, and literary criticism, it is rooted deeply in insightful comprehension of the works of both authors. It
weaves Elvish ropes linking the two together in ways few—if any—other
critical works have done.
Of course, writing an opus like this one is fraught with perils for those
who would link Faërie to the Cathedral. “Therein lies the problem with
books of this sort,” wrote this reviewer of Stratford Caldecott’s The Power
of the Ring: The Spiritual Vision behind “The Lord of the Rings” (2005). “The
reader perforce has two subjects to weigh and balance: literary scholarship and theological interpretation” (294).
This long and narrow bridge over the abyss Dr. Milbank has crossed
sure-footedly. A lecturer at the University of Nottingham, she has described herself in an online interview as “a literary scholar of the Victorian period and the Gothic novel, with interests in all manner of non-realist fiction: fantasy, horror, and mystery. I am also an Anglican priest.”
As one who has written and spoken on the spiritual links between the
Shire and the Flying Inn, taught university classes linking the two writers
(as she has), and discussed Chesterton’s influence on Tolkien with (among
others) Priscilla Tolkien and George Sayer, this reviewer was impressed
from the first page of the preface, which sets forth the order of the book,
to the conclusion wherein Milbank looks back lucidly on her topic in a
fine finale linking Father Christmas, Santa Claus, and Tom Bombadil.
By only the second page, Milbank conjoins Tolkien’s greatest tale to
Welshman David Jones’s wartime epic, In Parenthesis (1937), which “juxtaposes ordinary soldier talk of a range of periods with mythic tales in
order to give heroism and significance to the common people” (ix). The
power and the glory of this study is foretold, and, like all foretellings in
Tolkien and Chesterton, the prophecy is fulfilled.
One virtue of this work is the author’s mastery of existing criticism
of Chesterton and, especially, Tolkien. She stands tall and sees far because she stands on the giants’ shoulders. Likewise, her understanding
of Dante provides a connection between her subjects and his Divine Comedy. Her small “c” catholic incorporation of sources as variegated as the
Pre-Raphaelites, Agatha Christie, E. M. Forster, David Hume, Thomas
Aquinas, Eric Gill, Jacques Maritain, Alfred Noyes, Peter Pan, Pope Leo
XIII’s Rerum Novarum, and J. K. Rowling—all these in the introduction
alone—is stunning and superb.
A few immediate quibbles: while the text, typography, editing, and
layout are impeccable, the book is bound too tightly. Words in the inner
margins roll into the gutter; the spine resists overmuch, and thus annoyingly many words are lost in the crack. Also, for coherent reading, two
bookmarks are required: one for text, one for endnotes, located at the262
Book Reviews
end of each chapter. Footnotes would have been more felicitous.
The first of Milbank’s five chapters, “Making Strange: The Fantastic,” is the Introit. Immanuel Kant, Joan Aiken, Phillip Pullman, and Gertrude Stein lead her to this declaration: “We believe in ents, dwarves, etc.,
because we experience them through hobbit eyes; we believe in the hobbits . . . because they are our focalizers” (41). Throughout, she generously
lards her study with fat quotes from Tolkien and Chesterton. Beware the
side effect: readers will go clambering up their shelves for The Ball and the
Cross (1909) and other books too long unread.
Her exegesis of the delay at Moria due to the password “Speak,
Friend and Enter” sapiently suggests that “Legolas and Gimli had been
bickering, and the door gave an example . . . of the friendship the Fellowship themselves need if they are to complete their task” (46). The
coupling of the risen Gandalf ’s reappearance in The Two Towers with
Jesus’s two encounters with Mary Magdalene in John 20 and Luke 24
underscores Milbank’s priestly mastery of scripture.
The second chapter, “The Grotesque,” begins by connecting Dante
Gabriel Rossetti’s and John Millais’s religious paintings, and the outcry
they evoked to these authors. “Chesterton’s vision of controlling a million monsters finds a parallel in Tolkien’s attitude to ‘the wilderness of
the dragons’ of the Northern pagan past”(60-61). Treebeard gets especial attention as Tolkien’s best grotesque creation, and Milbank takes her
subtle knife to the difference between Tolkien’s text and Peter Jackson’s
films. The dwarves embody “this created action of the grotesque . . .
[they] are short, stone-hard and fierce, reflected also in their greed for
gold and antipathy to trees” (65). Gimli’s daring but unmaterialistic request for a single hair from Galadriel betokens the coming transcendence
of the dwarves. Milbank might have noticed that in the First Age, Galadriel denied Fëanor, the most cunning of the Eldar, a single hair. But, as
she says: “Arabesque elf and grotesque dwarf [rise above] their origins in
their friendship and in the growth towards understanding of each other’s
aesthetic” (65).
Shelob, Gollum, and Ungoliant draw their due as grotesques. Though
in this review, Milbank’s comments on Tolkien are the focus, her alliance
of his views to Chesterton’s is well-woven throughout. Her exposition on
the artwork of both shines further light on their fictive fellowship. Here,
too, the elements of Dante in both are astutely itemized. Tom Bombadil,
who will play a major role in her conclusion, is the final puzzle-piece
introduced.
In her third chapter, “Paradox and Riddles,” Milbank links Chesterton’s infatuation with paradox to Tolkien’s with riddles, noting that Bilbo,
Bombadil, and Aragorn are all riddles and riddlers. Indeed, paradox applies to Frodo and Sam as well. “The true happy ending of the novel lies263
Book Reviews
beyond the pages of the book, and yet is anticipated in moments such as
Sam and Frodo’s descent from Mount Doom, when Sam, a true Bunyanesque ‘Hopeful’, leads the lost and broken Frodo to safety” (111).
“Can I thank no one for the birthday present of birth?”: Chesterton’s
humble query from Orthodoxy (1908), begins the fourth chapter, “Fairy
Economics: Gift Exchange.” Here this study begins to rise on the wind
beneath its wings. Milbank writes: “For us gift-giving belongs to the private realm: we take off the price tag and wrap a commodity in tissue
paper to remove it from the world of market-value and exchange; we
turn it into a present, and thus restore it to the sacred: we enchant it,
as it were” (118). This contrasts with Saruman’s dehumanization of his
wage-slave workers in contrast to Beowulf, Belloc, Chesterton, and Tolkien’s economic philosophy of Distributism, hallowed by Pope Leo XIII.
Niggle’s eucatastrophe—“It’s a gift!”—joins hands with the pub sign in
The Flying Inn (1914): “Beer is freely given under the inn sign from what
appears to be a Cana-like never-emptied barrel” (122).
“It is no accident that Niggle’s subject is a tree because trees have
been emblematic of the divine gift right back to the Garden of Eden and
its Tree of Life” (126-27). The chapter’s last three pages on Galadriel’s
gifts to the Fellowship, with the “binding rite” of the Norse and AngloSaxon cup which she performs, brilliantly bind that moment to the tale
of the Ring.
The fifth and final chapter, “Fairy Poetics: Make Believe,” wraps this
superlative gift in the finest Yule finery. A tender commentary on Tolkien’s twenty years of Father Christmas letters—will his children’s letters
in reply, a gift indeed, ever be published?—harmonizes with Dickens’s
Scrooge, the Magi chronicle in Matthew, and Chesterton’s observations
about Father Christmas in The Everlasting Man (1925). Milbank’s identification of Tom Bombadil, a figure looming large throughout this book,
with Father Christmas is the perfect Ite, Missa est.
A five-page conclusion begins with the poetic “A, a, a, DOMINE DEUS”
by David Jones, from his The Sleeping Lord and Other Fragments (1974), and
ends with this benediction: “Tolkien’s ‘other’ world is always in relation
to our own, and his fantastic opens a space in which we can imagine and
entertain the seemingly impossible in such a way that we can both literally and metaphorically ‘assist in the effoliation and multiple enrichment
of creation.’ For it is only through the re-enchantment of the world by
our creative vision that we will find the courage and resources to prevent
its rape and destruction” (168-69).
In the review of Stratford Caldecott’s The Power of the Ring mentioned
above, this reviewer declared: “Reducing The Lord of the Rings to a Christian allegory similar to C.S. Lewis’s Narnian tales is mistaking a crucial part for the whole. As critics as diverse as Tom Shippey and Joseph264
Book Reviews
Pearce point out, one need not share the author’s faith to cherish his tale.
Many other things are at work in it: Tolkien’s love of trees and loathing
of technology, his enjoyment of good food, good friends, good cheer, and
good beer, his nostalgia for the ‘little England’ of bygone days, his experiences in the trenches of World War One. Caldecott’s book is colored by
viewing all these through the stained-glass lens of faith” (297). With all
respect to Caldecott, who Milbank cites with approbation in Chesterton
and Tolkien as Theologians, Catholicism’s stained-glass becomes clear and
bright as the light of Eärendil. Through her puissant and polished prose,
we can see clearly now.
MIKE FOSTER
METAMORA, ILLINOIS
WORKS CITED
——. “Interview with Dr. Alison Milbank author of Chesterton and Tolkien
as Theologians” Tolkien Library website, <http://www.tolkienlibrary.com/press/Chesterton_and_Tolkien_as_Theologians.
php> [Posted 22 October 2007; accessed February 2009]
Foster, Mike. Rev. of The Power of the Ring: The Spiritual Vision Behind The
Lord of the Rings, by Stratford Caldecott. Tolkien Studies 4 (2007):
293-297.
Simonson, Martin. The Lord of the Rings and the Western Narrative Tradition. Zurich and Jena: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. 256 pp. $22.80 /
£11.50 (trade paperback) ISBN 9783905703092. Cormarë Series no.
16.
The Lord of the Rings is a house built on many foundations. Almost a
decade ago, the late Daniel Timmons pointed out that “detractors rarely
recognize that the literary aspects of Tolkien’s work have been prominent in Western literature from Homer to the present day” (Clark and
Timmons 3). Worse, it would seem that many of Tolkien’s proponents are
equally unaware of this heritage. Timmons went on to say that “although
criticism exists on Tolkien’s works in relation to medieval literature and
twentieth-century fantasy, relatively few studies situate the author in a
broader context. Tolkien’s writings have links to every major period of
English literature from Old English to Renaissance poetics to religious
epic to nineteenth-century popular narrative” (5). It is this large gap in
the scholarship that Martin Simonson aims to spotlight in his new study,
The Lord of the Rings and the Western Narrative Tradition, which expands on
his previous work, published in volume three of Tolkien Studies (2006), as264
Book Reviews
Pearce point out, one need not share the author’s faith to cherish his tale.
Many other things are at work in it: Tolkien’s love of trees and loathing
of technology, his enjoyment of good food, good friends, good cheer, and
good beer, his nostalgia for the ‘little England’ of bygone days, his experiences in the trenches of World War One. Caldecott’s book is colored by
viewing all these through the stained-glass lens of faith” (297). With all
respect to Caldecott, who Milbank cites with approbation in Chesterton
and Tolkien as Theologians, Catholicism’s stained-glass becomes clear and
bright as the light of Eärendil. Through her puissant and polished prose,
we can see clearly now.
MIKE FOSTER
METAMORA, ILLINOIS
WORKS CITED
——. “Interview with Dr. Alison Milbank author of Chesterton and Tolkien
as Theologians” Tolkien Library website, <http://www.tolkienlibrary.com/press/Chesterton_and_Tolkien_as_Theologians.
php> [Posted 22 October 2007; accessed February 2009]
Foster, Mike. Rev. of The Power of the Ring: The Spiritual Vision Behind The
Lord of the Rings, by Stratford Caldecott. Tolkien Studies 4 (2007):
293-297.
Simonson, Martin. The Lord of the Rings and the Western Narrative Tradition. Zurich and Jena: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. 256 pp. $22.80 /
£11.50 (trade paperback) ISBN 9783905703092. Cormarë Series no.
16.
The Lord of the Rings is a house built on many foundations. Almost a
decade ago, the late Daniel Timmons pointed out that “detractors rarely
recognize that the literary aspects of Tolkien’s work have been prominent in Western literature from Homer to the present day” (Clark and
Timmons 3). Worse, it would seem that many of Tolkien’s proponents are
equally unaware of this heritage. Timmons went on to say that “although
criticism exists on Tolkien’s works in relation to medieval literature and
twentieth-century fantasy, relatively few studies situate the author in a
broader context. Tolkien’s writings have links to every major period of
English literature from Old English to Renaissance poetics to religious
epic to nineteenth-century popular narrative” (5). It is this large gap in
the scholarship that Martin Simonson aims to spotlight in his new study,
The Lord of the Rings and the Western Narrative Tradition, which expands on
his previous work, published in volume three of Tolkien Studies (2006), as265
Book Reviews
well as in various collections from Walking Tree Publishers.
Source-scholars have long argued that a wide variety of literary
sources forms one foundation on which The Lord of the Rings is built. Simonson attempts to extrapolate a larger, more generalized theorem from
this argument—that The Lord of the Rings may be regarded as an accretion
not merely of sources, but of genres, revealing the influence of the major
milestones in the history of western (that is to say, European) narrative
literature: the mythic, epic, romantic, and novelistic traditions. In parallel
to this, Simonson attempts to apply Northrop Frye’s theory of modes—
though not so much his theory of genres (both expounded in Anatomy of
Criticism)—to The Lord of the Rings. The book consists of five chapters, of
vastly disproportionate lengths: the first and final chapters, no more than
an introduction and afterword, are each less than five pages; the fourth
chapter is more than one hundred. The second provides a general summary of the western narrative tradition, without reference to Tolkien.
The third chapter introduces Frye’s mode of ironic myth in the context
of Tolkien and several Modernist writers. The fourth, the centerpiece of
the book, examines many aspects of The Lord of the Rings in the context
of what Simonson calls the “intertraditional dialogue.” While a certain
amount of background material may be necessary, fully one-third of the
book (19–93) has almost nothing to say about The Lord of the Rings or its
author, barring only occasional (and superficial) points of contact.
From the outset, a main contention is that it is difficult to assign The
Lord of the Rings to a discrete genre. What Simonson never makes clear,
however, is why this should present a problem for readers or scholars.
Walking Tree series editor Thomas Honegger offers a preemptive answer in his Preface: “Its defiance of traditional critical categories and
the critics’ difficulties to link it to a definite genre seems [sic] to lie at
the heart of many a dismissive response” (5). Yet there are questions left
unanswered. For instance: why is it inadequate to identify the genre as
“prose romance,” “heroic quest,” or simply “fantasy,” as many sympathetic critics have done?
Frye himself called The Lord of the Rings “quest romance” (Notebooks on
Romance 80) and “sentimental romance” (Notebooks for Anatomy 111, 274).
Frye’s own generalized definition of romantic literature, particularly its
second clause, seems perfectly applicable to The Lord of the Rings:
(1) A fictional mode in which the chief characters live in a
world of marvels (naive romance), or in which the mood is
elegiac or idyllic and hence less subject to social criticism than
in the mimetic modes. (2) The general tendency to present
myth and metaphor in an idealized human form, midway
between undisplaced myth and “realism.” (Anatomy 367)266
Book Reviews
That The Lord of the Rings may exhibit aspects of other genres at
diverse points should present no difficulty. Frye points out that “the forms
of prose fiction are mixed, like racial strains in human beings, not separable like the sexes” (Anatomy 305). And what of Honegger’s explanation,
that critics may dismiss The Lord of the Rings because they cannot identify
its genre? Frye admonishes such careless critics: “William Morris should
not be left on the side lines of prose fiction merely because the critic has
not learned to take the romance form seriously. Nor . . . should his choice
of that form be regarded as an ‘escape’ from his social attitude” (loc. cit.).
The reprimand applies equally well, mutatis mutandis, to Tolkien’s critics.
As for Edmund Wilson, who infamously dismissed Tolkien’s masterpiece as “juvenile trash,” Frye has an answer for him too: “Romance is
older than the novel, a fact which has developed the historical illusion that it
is something to be outgrown, a juvenile and undeveloped form” (Anatomy
306, emphasis added). Frye described his own reading of The Lord of the
Rings as “with great & almost uncritical pleasure” (Notebooks for Anatomy
284), but I daresay no one would accuse him of exhibiting “a life-long
appetite for juvenile trash.” Insatiably curious researchers are invited to
visit the Special Collections of Victoria University Library (in the University of Toronto system), which holds a copy of The Lord of the Rings
personally annotated by Frye.
The primacy of genre may be questioned from another angle as well.
Richard West has contended that Tolkien’s work “usually suffers when
current genre theory is applied to it;” instead, “it is more reasonable to
attempt to establish a new genre that more accurately limns the outlines
of this type of narrative . . . ‘the twentieth-century romance’” (West 9).
Simonson sidesteps the more fundamental questions of genre in his zeal
for advancing the view that Tolkien’s masterpiece represents all the major
genres of the western narrative tradition combined. Admirers of Tolkien
(myself included) will be sympathetic to his enthusiasm, and fortunately,
Simonson’s analysis, in extenso, is more convincing than not.
Where Simonson is at his best is in his demonstration that there is
a progression of “intertraditional dialogues” at work in The Lord of the
Rings, a discovery which has the potential to add a great deal to our understanding of the work. But before he can lay out this argument, Simonson must set up the necessary background on the history of the western narrative tradition. In his second chapter, he traces its development
with great care, from the epic tradition (represented by Homer, Virgil,
Appolonius, Rhodius, and the anonymous Beowulf-poet) to the romance
(medieval, renaissance, and modern); thence, to the “fantasy novels” of
Tolkien’s immediate forebears, George MacDonald and William Morris. Such a backdrop is clearly important because “the study of genres is
267
Book Reviews
based on analogies in form” (Frye Anatomy 95), and those formal analogies
will come up again and again in Simonson’s subsequent analysis. This
historical review might have benefited from including the Bible; though
not strictly part of the western narrative tradition per se, its influence on
that tradition is beyond question. Where Simonson’s survey begins with
epic literature, incorporating the Bible into his study would have offered
him a bridge further back in time, to mythic literature. Neither does Simonson make room for relevant “extraliterary” material—the bestiaries,
chronologies, hagiographies, and annals that provided Tolkien with inspiration. This material lies outside a self-imposed ambit but could have
buttressed his case. To his credit, Simonson deftly handles the material
he chose to include.
Simonson begins his third chapter with a short appraisal of critical
opinion on the question of the genre of The Lord of the Rings. But I find
the survey too abortive to support any extended analysis with genre at
its heart. Simonson reflects only three opinions: those of Tom Shippey,
Jared Lobdell, and Eduardo Segura. He errs in calling these “the most
recent ones” (73): Shippey’s view certainly antedates the publication of
Author of the Century, and Lobdell’s is demonstrably almost thirty years old!
(Simonson cites the 2004 edition of Lobdell’s book, The World of the Rings:
Language, Religion, and Adventure in Tolkien, but this is essentially a reissue,
with a new title and some new material, of his 1981 book, England and
Always: Tolkien’s World of the Rings; it therefore only appears to be recent.)
The balance of the chapter is concerned with an intriguing, and
mostly convincing, comparison between Tolkien and several Modernist
writers (to whom he is seldom likened): T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, James
Joyce, David Jones, and an assortment of contemporary war poets. Here,
Simonson owes an unacknowledged debt to John Garth—particularly in
the comparison to Wilfred Owen. The yardstick against which Simonson measures each author’s work, including Tolkien’s, is Frye’s mode of
ironic myth, which in Simonson’s interpretation “would seem to imply
an encyclopaedic incorporation of the total literary heritage of the past,
ironically contrasted with the present” (80). The author’s decision to ignore Frye’s other modes—the mythic, romantic, low and high mimetic—is questionable. Though The Lord of the Rings demonstrates all five at
various times (and occasionally, all at once), the ironic mode is more often
than not the least pertinent (Shippey Author 221–3; see also Shippey Road
210–2). While it may certainly be found in The Lord of the Rings, it is really more applicable to a work like The Hobbit. In Frye’s words, “the central principle of ironic myth is best approached as a parody of romance”
(Anatomy 223, emphasis added), but I do not think most scholars would
so describe The Lord of the Rings. Shippey feels (as I do) that the most often applicable of Frye’s five modes—to which Shippey suggests adding a268
Book Reviews
sixth, “true myth”—is the romantic.
In spite of these misgivings, I find much of interest in the chapter on
ironic myth. The best comparisons are with David Jones and T. S. Eliot.
Jones drew on the traditions of northwestern Europe to assemble a mythic backdrop for his poem, In Parenthesis—published the same year as The
Hobbit. In much the same way Tolkien wished to recreate a lost English
mythology, Jones was attempting to extrapolate a sense of “Britishness”
to contextualize his poem, and both authors mined similar mythic ore
to do so. For Eliot’s Four Quartets, Simonson has something to say about
each of its four constituent poems, published 1935–1942, but particularly “East Coker” and “Little Gidding.” Jared Lobdell, too, noticed the
relevance of the latter (1, 71); the original title of his book, England and
Always, is an answer to Eliot’s lines: “Here, the intersection of the timeless moment / is England and nowhere. Never and always.”
From here, Simonson proceeds to an extended comparison between
Tolkien and the triumvirate of Modernism: Joyce, Eliot, and Pound.
More often, these authors are vigorously contrasted with Tolkien, but Simonson observes that all four achieved a remarkably self-referential literature through an intensive use of allusion. What chiefly (but not always)
differs is their source material. They are also unanimously concerned
to reflect a “simultaneity of traditions” (101); it is which traditions they
chose, and how they reflected them, that varies. And finally, they may all
be scrutinized through the lens of Frye’s ironic mode. The difference is
that with the Modernists, the irony is internal and intentional; with Tolkien, external and accidental (102).
The real bulk of the book—more than half of its 225 pages—is taken up by the fourth chapter. From its first pages, the author sets up his key
questions: How do the four major narrative traditions—the mythic, epic,
romantic, and novelistic—interrelate with one another over the course
of The Lord of the Rings, and what are the limits to this intertraditional
dialogue? To answer them, the author puts forward a bewilderingly intricate rubric (114–6). Building in part on Bakhtin’s concept of the “literary
chronotope,” Simonson defines three narrative levels, each of which consists of several sublevels. His system includes: I) the Generic Narrative
Level, consisting of the 1) mythic, 2) epic, 3) romantic, and 4) novelistic
traditions; II) the Situational Narrative Level, consisting of five main influences: 1) physical space, 2) characters, 3) theme, 4) action, and 5) focalization; and III) the Transitional Narrative Level, consisting of seven
transitional types, in two groups: A) Prepared Transitions, comprising
the 1) accepted invitation, 2) rejected invitation, 3) dialogue, 4) mélange,
and 5) meta-dialogue; and B) Unprepared Transitions, comprising the 1)
intruder and 2) arrested intruder.
Out of this elaborate nomenclature, the most important pieces by far269
Book Reviews
are the four generic traditions (mythic, epic, romantic, and novelistic).
Simonson devotes most of the chapter to these, as well as to the mé-
lange—the intermingling, or “intertraditional dialogue,” as he frequently
refers to it—between them. He illustrates them with a series of loosely
organized studies of important characters and settings in The Lord of the
Rings. Other elements in his highly systematized approach are given less
attention, but Simonson offers some particularly astute observations on
“focalization” (129, 211, 217) and the “arrested intruder” (133, 180,
185). Put concisely, focalization refers to a sudden change in the active
narrator—as when Shelob renders Frodo unconscious, necessitating an
immediate focal shift to Sam. An arrested intruder, on the other hand,
makes a failed attempt to introduce elements drawn from other generic
traditions into the one currently dominating the story—as when Bilbo
calls for a lunch-break during the Council of Elrond, but the attempted
intrusion of quotidian, novelistic concerns fails to interrupt the epic proceedings.
Simonson’s character studies (Aragorn, Gandalf, Frodo) and his analyses of some of the novel’s key locations (the Shire, Rivendell, Moria) are
absorbing, if selective, and they offer new insights. Throughout, Simonson is at pains to demonstrate “the intricate fabric of narrative strategies
Tolkien had to weave” (137). In my view, he makes too little use of the
draft material published in the middle volumes of the History of Middleearth. While he acknowledges that this is not his aim (117), I hope that
future scholarship will build on Simonson’s work by demonstrating how
these interwoven strategies came to be assembled so coherently over such
a protracted period of writing and revision. “What Tolkien’s sometimes
maddening hesitations show,” Shippey notes, “is exactly how difficult he
found that blend of ancient and modern, realistic and fantastic, which
in the end he developed so successfully” (Road 321). Likewise, there is
insufficient contextualization with The Hobbit. There are only hints of it
in Simonson’s study, as where he notes that the “Last Homely House”
image of Rivendell from The Hobbit has really become the image of Bree
and The Prancing Pony in The Lord of the Rings. Rivendell, then, must
become something greater and must draw nearer to an epic, romantic,
and even mythic mélange. I would have liked more of this.
I find Simonson’s discussion of the final book of The Lord of the Rings
especially engrossing and his interpretation nuanced and sophisticated.
By the point of the novel’s dénouement, Simonson observes, the three principal protagonists, Frodo, Aragorn, and Gandalf, have largely lost the
“intertraditional flexibility” each had previously demonstrated, resulting in “a much flatter narrative, resembling a regular prose romance, in
which the epic and mythic elements practically disappear from the tale”
(219). At the same time, he points out that the return journey to the Shire270
Book Reviews
is a “physical and generic return,” in which the hobbits “disencumber the
narrative of the characters and the sceneries that used to imply changes
in the intertraditional dialogue” (218, my emphasis). Finally, in Simonson’s view:
Frodo comes to embody Tolkien’s particular approach to
ironic myth, describing with his example and in his narrative
a circular movement from the novel and back towards myth,
incorporating in the process other narrative traditions of the
past with great fluency while at the same time yielding space
to twentieth-century concerns. (217)
As worthwhile as Simonson’s conclusions, and as thorough the evidence he marshals to make them, one could wish for greater elaboration.
For example, Simonson relegates the “decidedly novelistic character” of
Saruman to a mere footnote (193). Of Éomer, he writes only that he is
“firmly rooted in the epic and chanson de geste traditions” (208). Even
Gimli and Legolas are given short shrift. Simonson ascribes them both
“narrative neutrality” (164), but he does not explain why this should be
or what its significance to the larger interplay of characters and traditions. He says almost nothing at all about Galadriel and Lothlórien.
His treatment of the intertraditional dialogue in its various manifestations is likewise abbreviated. Simonson notes that “the present analysis
is not an attempt at disclosing all the aspects of the interaction between
traditions in The Lord of the Rings— this would be impossible in a work of
this limited extension” (116). But any limits were self-imposed; the book
could easily have been longer. What Simonson does, he does well, but the
survey of intertraditional dialogues, as well as the character- and scenestudies, seem needlessly selective and curtailed.
Reviewers, more than casual readers, are apt to notice errors and
oversights. In Simonson’s list of “publications that have most frequently
included articles on Tolkien” (13 n1), the omissions of Tolkien Studies and
VII: An Anglo-American Review are startling. The Ivy Bush and The Green
Dragon inns were not in Hobbiton (121), but rather on the Bywater
Road and in Bywater, respectively. Simonson’s declares ominously that
“[the Ringwraiths] have come to find the One Ring and will stop at
nothing until they find it” (123), but this is certainly hyperbolic. Other
examples of hyperbole: calling the War of the Ring a “global conflict”
(179)—at most, it is continental; and calling Sauron “Ilúvatar’s enemy”
(216)—true, but irrelevant.
During his discussion of Gandalf, Simonson calls it a “mysterious assertion that Boromir ‘escaped’ before he died.” Simonson continues:271
Book Reviews
Escape from what? And what did the hobbits have to do with
it? One possible interpretation is that . . . Boromir’s soul was
saved due to his repentance, and the hobbits provided him
with a just cause that helped him achieve heroic redemption
in battle. (192)
One possible interpretation? Is this not—precisely and unambiguously—
the intended reading? But in an article published several months after
his book, Simonson has reconsidered. He still finds Gandalf ’s assertion
mysterious (I do not), but now it is “the only possible interpretation”
(“Similarities and Differences” 7).
The book, overall, is clear and well-written; however, a fair number
of isolated peculiarities of style, spelling, and usage catch the eye—e.g.,
“such an approach would only refrain the reader” (14), “without hardly
any” (116, 146), and “humoristic” (125, 128, 170, passim), to give but a
few examples. Also, it is Edoras, not Édoras (172). I suspect that some
of these irregularities arose because of the author’s movements between
English and Spanish, a guess corroborated by spelling errors such as
“antropomorphic” (Spanish antropomórfico) and “ortography” (ortografía).
Turning to paratextual elements, the index is serviceable, but incomplete. I noted many omissions, both in entries and in page references.
The index also has an interesting idiosyncrasy: Simonson gives the full
names of literary figures, but abbreviates the first names of scholars and
critics. So, we have “Chaucer, Geoffrey,” but “Frye, N.” In the bibliography, Simonson provides two separate lists: primary sources and secondary. The latter is further subdivided into sections containing scholarship
on genre and theory, on the Great War and Modernism, on Tolkien specifically, and finally, the not particularly useful “Dictionaries” (containing
one specialized dictionary and one encyclopedia).
Taken as a whole, The Lord of the Rings and the Western Narrative Tradition is an ambitious and intriguing new study. While neither faultless
nor comprehensive (so very few studies can be either), it nevertheless advances the study of Tolkien’s masterpiece in new directions. As I have
said, I hope it will prove to be the starting point for further research by
Simonson himself and others, examining The Lord of the Rings in both
greater breadth—taking into account its development, history, and context among Tolkien’s other writings—and depth—exploring characters
and settings relegated to the sidelines in Simonson’s book. Until that
time, it provides another solid foundation (one of many) for approaching
The Lord of the Rings.
JASON FISHER
DALLAS, TEXAS272
Book Reviews
WORKS CITED
Clark, George, and Daniel Timmons, eds. J.R.R. Tolkien and His Literary Resonances: Views of Middle-Earth. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press, 2000.
Frye, Northrop. Anatomy of Criticism: Four Essays. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1971.
——. Northrop Frye’s Notebooks on Romance. Ed. Michael Dolzani. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 2004. Collected Works of Northrop
Frye, Volume 15.
——. Northrop Frye’s Notebooks for Anatomy of Criticism. Ed. Robert D. Denham. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2007. Collected
Works of Northrop Frye, Volume 23.
Garth, John. Tolkien and the Great War: The Threshold of Middle-earth. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 2003.
Lobdell, Jared. England and Always: Tolkien’s World of the Rings. Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 1981.
Simonson, Martin. “The Chronicles of Narnia and The Lord of the Rings: Similarities and Differences between Two Children of the Great
War.” E-fabulations: E-journal Of Children’s Literature No. 2 (June
2008). <http://ler.letras.up.pt/uploads/ficheiros/4669.pdf>.
Retrieved 8 December 2008.
Shippey, Tom. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2002.
——. The Road to Middle-earth: How J.R.R. Tolkien Created a New Mythology.
Rev. and expanded ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 2003.
West, Richard C. “Contemporary Medieval Authors.” Orcrist 3 (January
1970): 9–10, 15.
The Mirror Crack’d: Fear and Horror in J.R.R. Tolkien’s Major Works, edited by
Lynn Forest-Hill. Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing,
2008. viii, 246 pp. $69.99 / £34.99 (hardcover) ISBN 9781847186348.
This anthology comprises ten essays, with an Introduction and Conclusion by the editor, and an index. Three of these essays (those by Maria
Raffaella Benvenuto, Amy Amendt-Raduege, and Julie Pridmore) grew
out of a session of the same name (sponsored by the Tolkien Society and272
Book Reviews
WORKS CITED
Clark, George, and Daniel Timmons, eds. J.R.R. Tolkien and His Literary Resonances: Views of Middle-Earth. Westport, CT: Greenwood
Press, 2000.
Frye, Northrop. Anatomy of Criticism: Four Essays. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1971.
——. Northrop Frye’s Notebooks on Romance. Ed. Michael Dolzani. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 2004. Collected Works of Northrop
Frye, Volume 15.
——. Northrop Frye’s Notebooks for Anatomy of Criticism. Ed. Robert D. Denham. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2007. Collected
Works of Northrop Frye, Volume 23.
Garth, John. Tolkien and the Great War: The Threshold of Middle-earth. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin, 2003.
Lobdell, Jared. England and Always: Tolkien’s World of the Rings. Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 1981.
Simonson, Martin. “The Chronicles of Narnia and The Lord of the Rings: Similarities and Differences between Two Children of the Great
War.” E-fabulations: E-journal Of Children’s Literature No. 2 (June
2008). <http://ler.letras.up.pt/uploads/ficheiros/4669.pdf>.
Retrieved 8 December 2008.
Shippey, Tom. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2002.
——. The Road to Middle-earth: How J.R.R. Tolkien Created a New Mythology.
Rev. and expanded ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 2003.
West, Richard C. “Contemporary Medieval Authors.” Orcrist 3 (January
1970): 9–10, 15.
The Mirror Crack’d: Fear and Horror in J.R.R. Tolkien’s Major Works, edited by
Lynn Forest-Hill. Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing,
2008. viii, 246 pp. $69.99 / £34.99 (hardcover) ISBN 9781847186348.
This anthology comprises ten essays, with an Introduction and Conclusion by the editor, and an index. Three of these essays (those by Maria
Raffaella Benvenuto, Amy Amendt-Raduege, and Julie Pridmore) grew
out of a session of the same name (sponsored by the Tolkien Society and273
Book Reviews
organized by the editor) at Leeds University’s 2006 International Medieval Congress, which had the theme “Emotion & Gesture.”
Maria Raffaella Benvenuto’s brief essay, “From Beowulf to the Balrogs: The Roots of Fantastic Horror in The Lord of the Rings,” argues
that the darker, gothic, side of Tolkien’s work has been ignored in favor
of its brighter realms. H. P. Lovecraft, she points out, traced much of
modern horror fiction back to medieval sources, and in fact the terrifying
elements of The Lord of the Rings regularly have earlier and more recent
parallels and antecedents: various critics have pointed out resemblances
between the Balrog and Surtr, Gollum and Grendel, the Ringwraiths and
vampires, Sauron and the deathless sorcerer. All of these are, Benvenuto
says, masterpieces of horror, and they illustrate the range of topics available for further research in Tolkien’s dark side.
Jessica Burke, in “Fear and Horror: Monsters in Tolkien and Beowulf,” asks “what the monster is and how it exists in relation to appetite,
corruption, the quest for power, and the nature of evil” (15). Drawing on
sources as diverse as Darwin’s studies of emotion and feminist biblical
scholarship, she considers Melkor, Sauron, Ungoliant, Shelob, Gollum,
Grendel, Grendel’s mother and Cain. Monsters are deformed versions
of ourselves, used since the Middle Ages as a tool of self-understanding;
pushed to the margins, they are both warnings against and scapegoats for
the violation of society’s rules. Even in the safety of reading, they excite
terror, particularly when they invite us to imagine our being unmade.
Thus, the Beowulf-poet terrifies by showing a world in which monsters
and heroes alike will be unmade. Melkor seeks to unmake Arda, Grendel,
Heorot. Gollum resembles both Grendel and Shelob in monstrous ways:
nonetheless, he is finally horrifying because we identify with him and can
imagine how we might be unmade in the face of a challenge too great
for us. The discussion of evil (28-31) misconstrues the Augustinian/Boethian position, and there are some errors in detail, e.g., Tolkien suggests
that Shelob came from drowned Beleriand, not Númenor (32) and the
Beowulf-poet says that Cain, not Grendel, is the father of all monsters (36,
cf. lines 111-115).
In “Of Spiders and (the Medieval Aesthetics of) Light: Hope and Action in the Horrors of Shelob’s Lair,” Reno E. Lauro begins an overview
of medieval aesthetics with a historical sketch of the Early Middle Ages
(anachronistically identifying St. Patrick as an agent of Anglo-Saxon
Christianity, the missionaries to the English as Augustinians, and Charlemagne as Holy Roman Emperor), then contrasts the medieval Neo-Platonist and Aristotelian philosophies of light. Tolkien’s imaginative reconstruction of the Crist’s reference to “earendel” recovers (à la Barfield) an
“ancient semantic unity” deeply tied to a metaphysics of light. Beginning
with the Flame Imperishable in the “Ainulindalë” (which Lauro, citing274
Book Reviews
Tolkien’s letter to Milton Waldman, connects, with little textual support,
directly to the Two Trees), light is a fundamental element of the legendarium, as also is its absence, darkness as a privation of the good. Shelob’s
Lair harkens back to the darkness of the Void, and the light of Eärendil
not only gives hope to Sam and Frodo, but calls them to action. Similarly,
for Tolkien creativity, sub-creation, is a form of recovery of semantic
unity which constitutes “a call to confront, resist and transform the world” (70,
emphasis in original). Sub-creation as practiced by the Elves at their best
is a form of revelation, art used in the service of recovery; as practiced
by Sauron, it is possessive, dominating, corrupting. All this recalls the philosophy of Heidegger, for whom both Art and Technology are ways of
revealing the truth (a-leitheia, “that which is unhidden”), though the use
of Technology always carries the risk of alienating ourselves “from our
existential state of poetic dwelling” (74). Tolkien depicts not only horror
but also, through his light imagery, our appropriate response to it: courage that comes from recovery of our basic way of being in the world.
Rainer Nagel’s essay, “Shelob and her Kin: The Evolution of Tolkien’s Spiders,” considers both internal development of The Lord of the Rings
and English etymology in response to claims that Shelob is ill-conceived
because she does not grow out of folkloric roots. In early drafts, Frodo
was to fall victim to a group of spiders like those in The Hobbit: successive versions saw them become more like the huge spiders of Beleriand
and then come together in one great opponent. Bilbo calls the spiders
in Mirkwood “Attercop,” from an Old English word for spider, “attorcoppe,” literally “poison-cup, poison-head,” where “-cop” itself already
means spider, as in “cobweb.” “She-lob,” on the other hand, uses Old
English “lobbe” (spider). Tolkien, Nagel suggests, would have noted that
Old English sources use “attor-cope” only in secular contexts, “lobbe”
only in religious ones, even when translating the same Latin word (and
would also have appreciated that “spider” apparently replaced “lobbe”
historically because the latter could, inconveniently, mean both “spider”
and “fly”). Her name, then, encapsulating spiritual menace, indicates
that Shelob holds an appropriate place among Tolkien’s monsters.
In “The Shadow beyond the Firelight: pre-Christian Archetypes and
Imagery Meet Christian Theology in Tolkien’s Treatment of Evil and
Horror,” Shandi Stevenson argues that Tolkien achieves a new synthesis
of Christian theology with the worldview of the pagan north, thereby
creating an “implicit ‘theory’ of evil” (93). Beginning with a brief account of the Germanic world’s “melancholy” outlook (95), she considers
Tolkien’s use of seven “elements” (such as darkness, forest, and monsters) borrowed from that world. The relevant distinction for Tolkien in
dealing with these is always between good and evil, and the introduction of that moral element evokes the moment when the northern world275
Book Reviews
encountered Christianity (Stevenson does concede that the pagan culture
could conceive of the world as evil [113]). In Tolkien’s Augustinian view,
only good is creative; good “cherishes the ‘other’,” as opposed to seeking
dominion over it; and the good will eventually conquer evil. Whereas
the pre-Christian North feared what evil might do, destroying even the
gods themselves, the new Christian society, while confident of the final
triumph of good, fears instead corruption: the possibility that one might
become evil. Unfortunately, the argument for this valuable insight relies
heavily on secondary sources and untenably subsumes all the encounters
between the several Germanic tribes and various strands of Christianity
under one broad category.
“The Cry in the Wind and the Shadow on the Moon: Liminality and the
Construct of Horror in The Lord of the Rings” by Michael Cunningham
gives an overview of the association of horror with the peril of liminal
moments, at literal or symbolic thresholds in Tolkien’s Secondary World:
such thresholds often mark off “zones or theatres of conflict” in which
characters can interact with the landscape. He traces examples from the
Woody End encounter with the Black Rider through the Old Forest, the
Barrow Downs, Moria, Minas Morgul, and Cirith Ungol to the landscape of Mordor itself.
Amy Amendt-Raduege’s “Barrows, Wights, and Ordinary People:
The Unquiet Dead in J.R.R. Tolkien’s The Lord of the Rings” discusses the
Barrow-wight in terms of Icelandic barrow-dwelling draugr and haugbúi,
of treasure-hoarding dragons, of St. Guthlac’s demons, and of spirits
who haunt their own graves. Noting that Tolkien shows us three sets
of barrows—those on the downs, those lining the road to Edoras (significantly “mounds” rather than “barrows”), and the Dwimorberg—she
argues that the Barrow-wight, some follower of the treacherous WitchKing now revived by his near presence, shares with those who gather at
the Stone of Erech the crime of oath-breaking. Thus in Middle-earth
those “who have committed no evil beyond the usual complement of
faults and failings” rest at ease, like those in the Chamber of Mazarbul,
under simblemynë or in Rath Dínen: the unquiet dead are those who “must
atone before they can find peace” (148). This holds out the hope that,
whatever death is, it is not the horror of being confined forever underground with a decaying corpse.
Romuald Ian Lakowski’s essay, “Horror and Anguish: The Slaying
of Glaurung and Medieval Dragon Lore,” surveys the complex development of Glaurung and Túrin in light of medieval (and, Spenser being
included, Renaissance) dragon lore mentioned in Tolkien’s unpublished
Dragon Lecture, noting from the beginning that Túrin’s several failures
radically differentiate his saga from its models. In early stages of the
saga, Glorund shows a typical Germanic dragon’s interest in hoarded276
Book Reviews
treasure; as the tale develops, malice and (paradoxically) bestiality become his prime characteristics. At each stage, Glorund/Glaurung has
specific similarities to Fáfnir, not least in the manner of his death, as
well as to the Beowulf dragon. In early versions, Túrin battles the dragon
for three days, reminiscent of the Redcrosse Knight’s symbolic struggle
with the Dragon: Tolkien may have removed this detail in order to avoid
the parallel of Túrin to Christ. Sigurd’s reforged sword Gram contrasts
with Túrin’s reforged Gurthang, while Fáfnir’s ægishjálmr (“helm of terror”—cf. Gorthol) and Prince Arthur’s dragon crest in The Faerie Queene
both provide parallels to the Dragon-helm of Dor-lómin. With dragons,
then, as in other areas, Tolkien consistently draws on medieval lore while
reshaping it to suit his purposes.
In “Shadow and Flame: Myth, Monsters and Mother Nature in Middle-earth,” Kristine Larsen considers human fear of the natural world.
Drawing on Dorothy Vitilliano’s concept of geomythology—the idea
that cultural stories both etiologically “explain” natural occurrences and
euhemeristically preserve memories of great geological events—and expanding it to include astromythology, she discusses various key elements
of Tolkien’s legendarium considered as late-recorded versions of mythological events. In some cases, this approach is clearly correct: Tilion’s love
for Arion is certainly an etiological account of solar eclipses (179-180).
The red glow in the north when the Valar attack Morgoth just after the
Elves awaken or as the dragons attack Gondolin also matches in form accounts of the Aurora Borealis as seen from relatively southern latitudes.
Eärendil’s battle with Ancalagon may, then, logically be a euhemeristic
account of a meteor shower coming from the direction of the planet
Venus (186), and the trenches which trip Fingolfin in his battle with Morgoth may give an etiological account of the land around an active volcano (190). But given that (as Strider points out) Bilbo transcribed these
latter stories in the home of Eärendil’s son, the fit is less comfortable.
The problem is not Larsen’s, but Tolkien’s: partly the incomplete reconciliation between Tolkien’s early and late conceptions of the mythology, partly a basic incompatibility between his interest in the change of
cultural elements (language, mythology) over time and his conception of
elves as fundamentally undying. Galadriel, for example, would have had
first hand accounts both of the battle of the Valar and of how it looked
from Cuiviénen, and is unlikely to have mistaken her uncle’s futilely heroic death for his tumbling into a fumarole.
After initial observations on the evil image of wolves in folklore, their
near extinction, and the threatened status of their traditional enemy the
wolfhound, “Evil Reputations: Images of Wolves in Tolkien’s Fiction” by
Julie Pridmore catalogues wolf encounters in The Lord of the Rings, The
Hobbit and various stages of the “Silmarillion”—also considering, in the277
Book Reviews
latter case, the development of Huan. Pridmore then discusses possible
sources for these wolf and hound episodes (e.g., the hound in Njal’s Saga
sets the example for Huan’s loyalty). Finally, the author discusses images
of wolves (and wolfhounds) in Tolkien illustration and in the Bakshi and
Jackson films.
As a whole, the collection would have benefited from closer proofreading: there is a distracting array of typographical (and even, in a few
cases, grammatical) errors.
JOHN WILLIAM HOUGHTON
THE HILL SCHOOL
POTTSTOWN, PENNSYLVANIA
Myth and Magic: Art according to the Inklings, ed. Eduardo Segura and Thomas
Honegger. Zollikofen, Switzerland: Walking Tree Publishers, 2007. [6],
iv, 342 pp. $21.25 / £10.35 (trade paperback) ISBN 9783905703085.
Cormarë Series no. 14.
This collection of essays undertakes a discussion of a subject of
great importance. Segura and Honegger explain in their Preface that
their goal is to work towards “a profounder understanding of what the
Inklings considered the key of literary creation, and of Art” (ii). The editors cite their hope that the volume will “become a first stepping-stone in
the process of reconstructing those conversations in which the Inklings
discussed, argued, and thoughtfully debated on Myth and Language”
(iii). The essays in the volume engage these central concerns from various
perspectives, examining the notions of myth-making and subcreation, of
magic and art, as Lewis and Tolkien theorized about them in their critical writing and embodied them in their fiction.
In drawing its readers into this complex and invigorating discussion,
the book very appropriately directs our attention to the questions and
debates that lie near the center of Inkling studies. Lewis and Tolkien’s
inquiries into the nature of myth and art and into the relationship between language, imagination, and subcreation inform almost all of their
personal and intellectual interests, such as linguistics, medieval literature,
fairy-stories, poetry, and Christian apologetics. This is the fascination
that drew the Inklings to each other and that unites their very different
fictional worlds. Segura and Honegger have done a great service to Inklings scholarship in raising these questions so evocatively.
The first chapter of the book is “Recovering the ‘Utterly Alien Land’:
Tolkien and Transcendentalism” by Martin Simonson. In this essay, Simonson establishes a fascinating and fruitful new context for Tolkien’s
concept of Recovery, articulated in his essay “On Fairy-stories,” linking it277
Book Reviews
latter case, the development of Huan. Pridmore then discusses possible
sources for these wolf and hound episodes (e.g., the hound in Njal’s Saga
sets the example for Huan’s loyalty). Finally, the author discusses images
of wolves (and wolfhounds) in Tolkien illustration and in the Bakshi and
Jackson films.
As a whole, the collection would have benefited from closer proofreading: there is a distracting array of typographical (and even, in a few
cases, grammatical) errors.
JOHN WILLIAM HOUGHTON
THE HILL SCHOOL
POTTSTOWN, PENNSYLVANIA
Myth and Magic: Art according to the Inklings, ed. Eduardo Segura and Thomas
Honegger. Zollikofen, Switzerland: Walking Tree Publishers, 2007. [6],
iv, 342 pp. $21.25 / £10.35 (trade paperback) ISBN 9783905703085.
Cormarë Series no. 14.
This collection of essays undertakes a discussion of a subject of
great importance. Segura and Honegger explain in their Preface that
their goal is to work towards “a profounder understanding of what the
Inklings considered the key of literary creation, and of Art” (ii). The editors cite their hope that the volume will “become a first stepping-stone in
the process of reconstructing those conversations in which the Inklings
discussed, argued, and thoughtfully debated on Myth and Language”
(iii). The essays in the volume engage these central concerns from various
perspectives, examining the notions of myth-making and subcreation, of
magic and art, as Lewis and Tolkien theorized about them in their critical writing and embodied them in their fiction.
In drawing its readers into this complex and invigorating discussion,
the book very appropriately directs our attention to the questions and
debates that lie near the center of Inkling studies. Lewis and Tolkien’s
inquiries into the nature of myth and art and into the relationship between language, imagination, and subcreation inform almost all of their
personal and intellectual interests, such as linguistics, medieval literature,
fairy-stories, poetry, and Christian apologetics. This is the fascination
that drew the Inklings to each other and that unites their very different
fictional worlds. Segura and Honegger have done a great service to Inklings scholarship in raising these questions so evocatively.
The first chapter of the book is “Recovering the ‘Utterly Alien Land’:
Tolkien and Transcendentalism” by Martin Simonson. In this essay, Simonson establishes a fascinating and fruitful new context for Tolkien’s
concept of Recovery, articulated in his essay “On Fairy-stories,” linking it278
Book Reviews
not only to the thinking of the English Romantics, but also to the theories
of the American Transcendentalists Ralph Waldo Emerson and Henry
David Thoreau. Simonson aptly indicates that Emerson and Thoreau’s
emphasis on language makes their thought particularly germane to Tolkien’s artistic undertaking: Thoreau, for instance, was attempting to develop a “mythic language of the wild to express a modern perception of the
eternal and to recover a fresh perception of the world” (9). Through the
linguistic roots of his fiction and his dedication to unfolding the reality
of his secondary world, Tolkien “updates Thoreau’s comparatively lame
attempts at expressing a vision of timeless nature with a mythic grammar
for the contemporary reader” (17).
In “New Learning and New Ignorance: Magic, Goeteia, and the Inklings,” Tom Shippey points out that the fiction of both Tolkien and
Lewis manifests their reflections on the different senses in which the word
“magic” can be used, and the very different moral and spiritual implications of those senses. In this essay, Shippey engages primarily with the
criticism and fiction of Lewis, beginning with his long discussion at the
beginning of English Literature in the Sixteenth Century, Excluding Drama of the
differences between the medieval conception of magic, associated with
Faerie, and the Renaissance magia of books and spells, which is closely
linked both to scientia, scientific inquiry, and to goeteia, witchcraft or the
summoning of spirits. Shippey begins by challenging the strict dichotomy
that Lewis asserts between medieval and Renaissance concepts of magic
(27), and then turns to an exploration of Lewis’s various depictions of
magic and its relation to both religion and science, focusing especially on
Lewis’s Space Trilogy. In an attempt to illustrate the complex inter-relations among the four primary concepts involved, Shippey schematically
summarizes Lewis’s “attitude to magic” as a square which shows religion
and magia on the one side opposed to scientism and goeteia on the other
(43).
Dieter Bachmann’s essay, “Words for Magic: goetia, gûl, and lúth,” examines Tolkien’s terms for magic and serves as an excellent complement
to Shippey’s consideration of C.S. Lewis’s approach to the same question. Bachmann argues that, like Lewis, Tolkien appealed to the distinction between natural magic (magia) and ceremonial magic (goetia) but that
he insisted “that the moral distinction lies in the magician’s motive or
purpose, not in the technical question of whether he is acting on matter
or on a spirit” (50). Bachmann thus derives a “fourfold division of different kinds of ‘magic’” (52). When ceremonial magic is used for power, it
is manifested in necromancy, Renaissance witchcraft, or the “deceits” of
Sauron; when its goal is wonder and “aesthetic pleasure,” it is manifested
in the magic of Faerie, in elvish enchantment (52). When natural magic
is applied for domination, it results in industrialization and “the vulgar279
Book Reviews
devices of the laborious, scientific magician,” but natural magic can also
be manifested in the wholesome delight in making, as evidenced in the
Silmarils or Gandalf ’s fireworks.
In “When is a Fairy Story a Faërie Story? Smith of Wootton Major,” Verlyn Flieger gives us an excellent and refreshing essay on a much-neglected
piece of Tolkien’s fiction. Flieger demonstrates how Smith of Wootton Major
serves as a “practical application” of the criteria of a true fairy-story that
Tolkien laid out in his essay “On Fairy-stories” (57). In his essay, Tolkien
asserts that the heart of fairy-stories is the wonder of humans who somehow enter the Perilous Realm of Faërie, and Flieger argues that in Smith,
Tolkien attempts to capture that marvelous and elusive atmosphere of
Faërie (58), providing his protagonist and his readers a glimpse of its
wonders, even if not understanding. For this reason, Flieger pays Smith
a most unusual sort of compliment, calling it “Tolkien’s severest, most
uncompromising, least accessible piece of fiction” (62). Flieger goes on to
suggest quite compellingly that Tolkien’s story of the craftsman in Faërie
can also be understood as “dramatizing the relationship of the artist with
the world of imagination,” thus encapsulating the experience of both the
reader and the writer of fairy-stories.
“Myth, Fact, and Incarnation” by Colin Duriez explores Lewis’s contemplation of the relationship between the abstract and the concrete,
between history and truth. Duriez argues that Lewis finds this link in
the imagination, claiming that a “thing captured by the imagination . . .
belongs to the world of experience, sensation, and contingency and yet
embodies general qualities of meaning by the very nature of imaginative
perception” (74). The essay goes on to show that Lewis viewed myth as
“the greatest achievement of the imagination,” as it had “the ability to
make concrete what would otherwise remain abstract” (89). Finally, Duriez argues that for Lewis the “complete reconciliation of the abstractconcrete division” is the “incarnation of the divine in the human,” the
moment at which “myth became fact” (96).
Patrick Curry compares Tolkien’s concerns about the modern world
and its perspective with those of social philosopher Max Weber in “Iron
Crown, Iron Cage: Tolkien and Weber on Modernity and Enchantment.” Curry claims that the two writers’ “diagnoses of modernity . . .
were tantalizingly similar” (99), stating that the heart of this similarity
lies in their conceptions of magic and enchantment. Curry says that, for
Tolkien, “the hallmark of magic is will, whereas that of enchantment
is wonder” (100), concepts he also asserts to be intricately involved in
Weber’s analysis of modern society (101). The essay is novel and establishes an unusual connection, but the argument itself lacks the clarity and
linearity that would make it compelling. The central concepts of magic
and enchantment, themselves a fascinating link between the two authors,280
Book Reviews
get lost in digressions on the later impact of Weber on social theory or
discussion of the various mythological and historical associations with
the mineral iron.
In “A Mythology for England?: Looking a Gift Horse in the Mouth,”
a wide-ranging and authoritative essay, Thomas Honegger outlines how
Tolkien attempts to place “his mythopoeic writings within a framework
that would allow him to dedicate it to England, his country” (110). Honegger begins from the well-known premise that Tolkien “bemoans the
fact that his country lacks a genuinely English mythology” (110), and
he walks his readers clearly and compellingly through Tolkien’s early
writings to show how Tolkien set out to fill this national mythological
gap. The “linking of Tolkien’s Legendarium with England,” Honegger
explains, “is achieved predominantly, though not exclusively, by means
of the frame narratives” (116-7), whose central figures are pseudo-historical Anglo-Saxon men who encounter Elves and transmit the stories of Elvish legends. Moreover, in early versions of the Legendarium,
Tolkien explicitly identifies Tol Eressëa with the British Isles themselves.
Although Tolkien’s later writings moved away from these explicit ties between Elvenhome and England, Honegger argues that The Lord of the
Rings remains mythologically tied to England through the literary activity
of the hobbits, who capture “some of the best elements of ‘Englishness’”
(126).
In “Lewis’s View of Myth as a Conveyor of Deepest Truth,” Devin
Brown argues that, despite Lewis’s numerous expositional writings, Lewis
believed that fiction serves as a more powerful vehicle for spiritual truth,
enabling him not merely to state, but to suggest (133). In his fiction, therefore, Lewis attempts to “express truth through a mythic format” (133).
The essay concludes with several pairs of long quotations, examples of
particular spiritual ideas that Lewis has explored in both a fictional and
a non-fictional setting. The device is a happy one, although the larger
argument about the nature of myth might have been more effectually
furthered by a more detailed analysis of the passages thus juxtaposed.
Miryam Librán-Moreno’s essay, “‘A Kind of Orpheus-Legend in Reverse’: Two Classical Myths in the Story of Beren and Lúthien,” contains
a remarkably thorough catalogue of similar elements in Tolkien’s story
of Beren and Lúthien as it evolved through the years in which Tolkien
developed it and in many different Greek and Latin versions of the myths
of Orpheus and Eurydice and Protesilaus and Laodameia. Librán-Moreno’s establishment of the Protesilaus and Laodameia connection in addition to the more common link to Orpheus is an intriguing one, but the
essay on the whole contains very little direct discussion of Tolkien’s story,
and concludes only that these two myths exerted “an influence on Tolkien’s own idiosyncratic material” (182). The essay demonstrates extensive281
Book Reviews
research, yet to this reviewer it illustrates the impulse that Tolkien cautioned against in his “soup” metaphor in his essay “On Fairy-stories”:
the impulse to look past the soup itself, the “story as it is served up by its
author,” in a desire to discover the “bones of the ox out of which it has
been boiled,” the story’s “sources or material” (MC 120).
In “A Monster that Matters: Tolkien’s Grendel Revisited,” Eugenio
Olivares-Merino sets out to “provide a systematic description of how
Tolkien conceived Grendel, the hero’s first foe in the Anglo-Saxon poem
Beowulf” (187). The essay provides, at great length, a summary and discussion of Tolkien’s argument about Grendel in his great essay “Beowulf:
The Monsters and the Critics,” as well as an interesting discussion of
Beowulf and its critical reception prior to Tolkien’s seminal essay. Olivares-Merino’s essay, though quite readable, seems rather out of place in
this collection, as it does not explicitly engage any of the central themes
of the book. He remarks at the end of the essay: “I assume that much
could be said about the relevance of Grendel behind some of the creatures in The Hobbit or The Lord of the Rings,” but no such discussion follows,
nor any treatment of the implications that Tolkien’s literary analysis of
Beowulf and its monsters may have for his concept of myth or of storytelling. The essay raises many questions, but posits few answers.
“A Tale as Old as Time, Freshly Told Anew: Love and Sacrifice in
Tolkien, Lewis and Rowling” by Margarita Carretero-González examines the “centrality of love and sacrifice” in the works of Tolkien, C. S.
Lewis, and J. K. Rowling (247). Carretero-González focuses on a comparison between the magical effects of Lily Potter’s sacrifice of her life to
protect her son Harry in Rowling’s books, of Aslan’s sacrifice to redeem
the life of Edmund in Lewis’s The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe, and of
Gandalf ’s sacrifice on the Bridge of Khazad-dûm in The Lord of the Rings.
The treatment of each author is rather brief and glancing, though the
essay dwells somewhat longer on the reception of J. K. Rowling and the
appropriateness of her inclusion in a conversation on the Inklings.
The next chapter is “The Hidden Meanings of the Name ‘Ransom’:
Strange Philology and ‘Contradiction’ in C.S. Lewis’s Cosmic Trilogy”
by Fernando Soto and Marta Garcia de la Puerta. This essay’s central
concern, a philological investigation of the name of Ransom, the protagonist of C.S. Lewis’s space trilogy, seems an appropriate undertaking. The conclusion to which the authors are led by this analysis—that
Ransom is “a Christlike figure”—seems unobjectionable, though their
supposition that Ransom’s title of Director in That Hideous Strength is intended to mask or remove Ransom’s “redeemer persona” is unconvincing (282). Not content to analyze what Lewis actually wrote, the authors
instead premise much of their argument on what they wish Lewis had
said, but did not. Soto and Garcia de la Puerta allude to the fictitious282
Book Reviews
etymology that Lewis gives for Ransom’s name in Perelandra, explaining that it derives from “Ranolf ’s son” (270), but they opine that Lewis
“might have been more linguistically consistent” if he had named the ancestor “Ramolf ” instead (270). If Lewis had done this, they suggest, then
Ransom’s name would not be Ransom but Ram-son, which would connect “Ransom/Ramson” (as they proceed to refer to him) with a lamb,
and therefore Christ.
In “‘As Under a Green Sea’: Visions of War in the Dead Marshes,”
John Garth argues that in the chapter “The Passage of the Marshes”
in Book IV of The Lord of the Rings, we can perceive Tolkien’s “expressive powers quickened again by memories of the First World War, seen
through the prism of the Second” (311). This essay sifts very carefully through the evidence of Tolkien’s letters, both those expressing his
thoughts during World War II, while he was writing Book IV, and those
containing his memories and reflections on his harrowing personal experiences in the trenches in World War I. Garth does a remarkable job of
combining this evidence with a close and sensitive reading of Tolkien’s
descriptions of the Dead Marshes, augmented by thoughtful and evocative comparisons of Tolkien’s imagery to that of other World War I writers. The weakness of the essay is a tendency at times to lay on some of
Tolkien’s phrases in his letters more weight than their context may easily
support, but nevertheless the case that Garth makes in this essay is a very
strong and suggestive one.
In the final chapter, “Leaf by Niggle and the Aesthetics of Gift: Towards a Definition of J.R.R. Tolkien’s Notion of Art” Eduardo Segura
considers the relationship between Tolkien’s understanding of human art
and his Christian worldview. He begins with some audacity by challenging the uncritical way in which Tolkien’s oft-quoted dislike of allegory
is often accepted. In his rejection of allegory, Tolkien expresses preference for an alternative approach to the composition and reception of
stories: “history” and “applicability.” Segura argues that this preference
is rooted in his understanding of the “relation between myth and truth”
(316), a relationship that depends both on his Christian outlook and his
aesthetic theories. The centerpiece of the essay is a reading of “Leaf by
Niggle,” which Segura treats as a very personal reflection on both artistic
and spiritual realities, in which Tolkien shows that human art as well as
the relation between myth and truth has, at its core, grace, the free gift
of God. In the end, Segura argues, Tolkien shows that he sees art “as a
means to be redeemed, and to redeem others” (335).
This collection is a noble undertaking, and it contains much learning
and several very important and enlightening studies. There is no denying,
however, that its contents are rather uneven—uneven in some superficial
though jarring ways, such as the length of the chapters: one essay is over283
Book Reviews
five times the length of one of its near neighbors. More importantly, the
essays vary significantly in how fully they engage with the fascinating central concerns of the collection. Some essays engage Lewis and Tolkien’s
notions of myth and art very directly and very fruitfully. Others are only
connected to this central theme tangentially, and some seem disinclined
to engage the primary concepts involved in the discussion.
The collection, therefore, leaves a sense of disappointment that may
recall Gimli’s sober assessment of human endeavors: “It is ever so with
the things that Men begin: there is a frost in Spring or a blight in Summer, and they fail of their promise” (RK, V, ix, 149). Perhaps, however,
we can join Legolas in recalling that “seldom do they fail of their seed,”
and hope that this collection will stimulate much further discussion on
this important subject.
COREY OLSEN
WASHINGTON COLLEGE
CHESTERTOWN, MARYLAND
The Silmarillion: Thirty Years On, edited by Allan Turner. Zollikofen: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. [4], iv, 168 pp. $17.00 / £8.30 (trade paperback) ISBN 9783905703108. Cormarë Series no. 15.
Has it really been more than three decades since The Silmarillion landed in bookstores to the bewilderment of some and the delight of others?
A lot of water has flowed under the bridge to Nargothrond since then,
giving us new perspective on Christopher Tolkien’s first attempt to publish a portion of his father’s sprawling legacy.
With the multi-volume History of Middle-earth now behind us, shall
we consider The Silmarillion simply as a piece of literature in the Tolkien
canon or can we still continue to use it as resource for study? Both, I
think. Although I’ve read The Lord of the Rings many times, I’ve always
preferred The Silmarillion, embracing it first as a work of art and only
later as a resource to be mined for knowledge of Tolkien’s legendarium.
And I still find myself returning to it for study, because there are passages
and precise turns of phrase that occur nowhere else in the vast archive of
material published by Tolkien’s son Christopher.
As The Silmarillion: Thirty Years On ably demonstrates, there is still
much to be gleaned from that early presentation of Middle-earth mythology and legend. Allan Turner’s well-balanced and thoughtful collection of essays chosen to commemorate the thirty-year publication anniversary of The Silmarillion is a welcome addition to Tolkien scholarship.
The volume is slim at 176 pages, but the depth and breadth of thought
encompassed in these essays makes it well worth owning. Topics range283
Book Reviews
five times the length of one of its near neighbors. More importantly, the
essays vary significantly in how fully they engage with the fascinating central concerns of the collection. Some essays engage Lewis and Tolkien’s
notions of myth and art very directly and very fruitfully. Others are only
connected to this central theme tangentially, and some seem disinclined
to engage the primary concepts involved in the discussion.
The collection, therefore, leaves a sense of disappointment that may
recall Gimli’s sober assessment of human endeavors: “It is ever so with
the things that Men begin: there is a frost in Spring or a blight in Summer, and they fail of their promise” (RK, V, ix, 149). Perhaps, however,
we can join Legolas in recalling that “seldom do they fail of their seed,”
and hope that this collection will stimulate much further discussion on
this important subject.
COREY OLSEN
WASHINGTON COLLEGE
CHESTERTOWN, MARYLAND
The Silmarillion: Thirty Years On, edited by Allan Turner. Zollikofen: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. [4], iv, 168 pp. $17.00 / £8.30 (trade paperback) ISBN 9783905703108. Cormarë Series no. 15.
Has it really been more than three decades since The Silmarillion landed in bookstores to the bewilderment of some and the delight of others?
A lot of water has flowed under the bridge to Nargothrond since then,
giving us new perspective on Christopher Tolkien’s first attempt to publish a portion of his father’s sprawling legacy.
With the multi-volume History of Middle-earth now behind us, shall
we consider The Silmarillion simply as a piece of literature in the Tolkien
canon or can we still continue to use it as resource for study? Both, I
think. Although I’ve read The Lord of the Rings many times, I’ve always
preferred The Silmarillion, embracing it first as a work of art and only
later as a resource to be mined for knowledge of Tolkien’s legendarium.
And I still find myself returning to it for study, because there are passages
and precise turns of phrase that occur nowhere else in the vast archive of
material published by Tolkien’s son Christopher.
As The Silmarillion: Thirty Years On ably demonstrates, there is still
much to be gleaned from that early presentation of Middle-earth mythology and legend. Allan Turner’s well-balanced and thoughtful collection of essays chosen to commemorate the thirty-year publication anniversary of The Silmarillion is a welcome addition to Tolkien scholarship.
The volume is slim at 176 pages, but the depth and breadth of thought
encompassed in these essays makes it well worth owning. Topics range284
Book Reviews
from Northernness to eucatastrophe, from mythopoeia to narratology,
from nostalgia to theologisation, all displaying unique, carefully argued,
and sometimes contrasting points of view.
The collection begins with Rhona Beare’s “A Mythology for England,” bringing The Silmarillion commentary full circle, so to speak, for
it was she who queried Tolkien about The Lord of the Rings via letters in
1958 and the early 60s with persistent questions of the detailed, nit-picking type that many authors dread and never answer—“What were the
colours of the two wizards mentioned but not named in the book?” “Did
the Witch-king ride a pterodactyl at the siege of Gondor?” (Letter 211, in
Letters). Luckily for us, Tolkien answered her candidly and at some length
on many topics, adding immensely to our understanding of his conception of Middle-earth. Some forty years later, Beare published a pamphlet
titled J.R.R. Tolkien’s “The Silmarillion” (New Lambton, Australia: Nimrod
Publications, 1999), which I recall reading with some distaste because
of its study-guide style. Happily, the section from that guide reworked
for this new collection of criticism is much improved, incorporating a
connection between Eärendil and the Bickling Homilies into her discussion of the “North-western temper and temperature” toward which the
legendarium is slanted.
Beare’s analysis of “northern” and “southern” myths and legends
as the product of climate and landscape—the “warm dry climate of
Greece” vs. the “cool, cloudy, misty and damp” environs of England
and the Celtic lands—remains sound, as does her discussion of Tolkien’s
debt to Beowulf. All this is common knowledge for most readers of The
Silmarillion. The transition from Northern “race-memory” of sea-faring
peoples to Tolkien’s recurring dream of Atlantis and the way in which it
surfaces in the Akallabêth is of more interest, but Beare’s added insight
into the possible derivation of Eärendil is where her essay provides new
avenues of thought for the curious. “Myths leave traces on language”
(20), she explains, and for Tolkien, this meant looking for clues in Old
English. Following traditional usage for earendel, “Eärendil” is both name
and noun, both hero and the Morning Star. Beare’s thoughtful discussion
of traces in both Crist and the Homilies is well-supported with numerous
examples, making this the highlight of the essay.
A more difficult read is Anna Slack’s “Moving Mandos: The Dynamics of Subcreation in ‘Of Beren and Lúthien’.” Slack’s premise—that
Tolkien’s theory of eucatastrophe can be traced through song and oath
in this great tale from The Silmarillion —is a valid topic of inquiry with an
interesting, unique approach. The article suffers, however, from a vagueness and turgidity of language that might discourage less determined
readers. Slack’s tendency to quality her points by piling on multiple prepositional phrases where just one would do is only part of the problem:285
Book Reviews
“The dynamics of subcreation, or the relations between and effects of
performative utterances on and in the historical and eternal worlds, are
set out at length by Tolkien in ‘On Fairy Stories’, where these dynamics
highlight the contrasting natures of eucatastrophe and dyscatastrophe”
(60). Ambiguous word choice and misplaced modifiers add to the confusion. For example, in discussing Lúthien’s association with the eternal,
Slack writes, “As well as being undeniably the most beautiful of Ilúvatar’s
children, the narrator here represents in the secondary world (the account we are reading) a historical figure who is undoubtedly an embodiment of the eternal” (70). Obviously, it is Lúthien who is most beautiful
and not the narrator, but such constructions impede the flow of the argument, especially when it is unclear whether the word represents should be
read as “presents” or “stands for.”
Writing style aside, Slack’s argument for Tolkien’s use of oath and
song to invoke eucatastrophe is a fertile topic for which ample evidence
can be found. The first part of the essay establishes the groundwork for
her theory, presenting what Slack terms the two textual modes of the
“Beowulf Syndrome” (dyscatastrophe or tragic outcome) counterbalanced by the “Eagle Effect” (eucatastrophic outcome). “For the eucatastrophic to be a credible and effective device,” Slack explains, “there had
also to be dyscatastrophe” (62). Once this concept of balance in the eternal world is laid out, with evidence from the “Ainulindalë,” Slack applies
it in the second part of her essay to the archetypal tale of Beren and
Lúthien. Here the concepts of oath-taking and song-making as agents of
both types of modes are presented, in which oaths are strongly associated
with the negative aspects of Melkor, and songs are “agents of eucatastrophe.” As Slack points out, the “power of the oath is in its ability to bind
the speaker, and the great danger in oaths is in breaking them” (68). For
example, the conflicting oaths of Thingol and Beren bind them both to
the curse of the Silmarils. In counterbalance, we have “song as a subcreative act” that brings joy and a glimpse of the eternal, however brief
and fleeting, in a world chilled by Melkor’s presence. Lúthien’s legacy to
Middle-earth, asserts Slack, is this power of song to instill hope in even
the smallest of hearts, in the darkest of places.
Next up is Michaël Devaux’s textual study, “The Origins of the Ainulindalë: The Present State of Research,” translated from its original
French to English by editor Allan Turner. The article’s first premise—to
identify trends in interpretation—required comparison of earliest to latest versions of Ainulindalë according to the texts published in Christopher
Tolkien’s History of Middle-earth series. Sorting out the versions of authority relied on by various essays focusing on Tolkien’s creation myth is
essential, Devaux asserts, in distinguishing “elements of Christianity and
those of the Northern matter for any given period” (82). Devaux includes286
Book Reviews
two chronological charts that graphically demonstrate the evidence of
Tolkien’s relentless urge to revise.
Basing the structure of the second part of his essay on Tolkien’s five
stages of creation as revealed in the “Ainulindalë,” Devaux discusses how
these stages—Creation of the Ainur, Communication of Eru’s Design
to the Ainur, the Great Music (theme and variations), the Vision of Eru,
and the Achievement or Realization of the vision—relate to Tolkien’s
Catholicism. In other words, he undertakes to establish the degree to
which “theologisation” of the legendarium can be charted through the
various versions of Tolkien’s creation myth. In the earliest version (from
The Book of Lost Tales), for example, there is no “Eä!” or equivalent of the
Word of God that causes things to be, which suggests a more Northern
mythological outlook. Only in subsequent versions does the Christian
concept of a “creation” become evident. And what are we to make of the
various versions of the “divine song” through which the Ainur and the
world are sung into existence? Devaux’s insightful and meticulous discussion of the roles played by the Creator and his sub-creators (the Ainur)
through Tolkien’s endless revisions provides the real meat of this essay.
Of special interest to me as a reviewer is Jason Fisher’s article, “From
Mythopoeia to Mythography: Tolkien, Lönnrot, and Jerome,” because it
reflects in some degree my own study of the Kalevala’s influence on Tolkien. Fisher’s essay focuses first on the similarities of content and language
(epic themes and linguistic borrowings) found in the Finnish national
epic, Kalevala, and The Silmarillion—the “Mythopoeia” section of the article. He then points out that in style, these two works are quite different.
The style of The Silmarillion, as many have said, could be better described
as biblical, which provides Fisher a segue into his extended discussion of
the Bible’s influence (in particular the Latin Vulgate) on Tolkien’s work.
Says Fisher, these contact points “between the Bible and The Silmarillion,
we will see, extend beyond the purely stylistic and into the domain of
content and theological influence as well” (123).
In the “Mythography” segment of his essay, Fisher concentrates on
Christopher Tolkien’s role as literary executor for his father’s vast and
sprawling creative output. Having convincingly established the resonances of both the Kalevala and the Vulgate within The Silmarillion, Fisher takes
an in-depth look at the ways in which Christopher Tolkien’s handing of
his father’s legendarium resembles the work done by the compilers/editors of those influential works, namely, Elias Lönnrot and St. Jerome. In
clear, logical prose, Fisher explains the major focus of his study: whereas
“J.R.R. Tolkien may have been emulating the product of Lönnrot’s and
Jerome’s efforts, Christopher Tolkien was emulating the process” (127).
Of particular significance is Fisher’s discussion of Christopher’s editorial
choices—and changes—that produced the 1977 volume. Fisher suggests287
Book Reviews
that Christopher Tolkien, with assistance from Guy Kay, added more
than mere compilation expertise in creating the Silmarillion manuscript,
in particular, the section titled “The Ruin of Doriath.” Whether such
editorial liberties enhance or detract from the final outcome remains
debatable, but there can be no question, according to Fisher, that “the
published Silmarillion more accurately represents a daunting complex of
choices” (135) that reveal as much about Christopher Tolkien as the endless revisions do about his father.
Nils Agøy’s essay, “Viewpoints, Audiences and Lost Texts in The Silmarillion,” addresses a problem I recall experiencing the first time I read
the book: from whose point-of-view is it told? It took me some time to adjust to just reading the stories for their own sake and not worrying about
whose handed-down text each tale might purport to be. As it turns out,
this very dilemma comprises Agøy’s fascinating discussion of the possible
approaches to viewpoint in The Silmarillion.
The problem of shifting viewpoint, Agøy suggests, is implicit in the
fact that what lends Tolkien’s Middle-earth its sense of authority is the
frequent reference to and reliance on “lost texts” of the Edain and Eldar.
This problem is compounded by the fact that “for the great majority of
Tolkien readers, [the 1977 Silmarillion] is the standard, authoritative source
of ‘information’ about the Elder Days” (141). Agøy convincingly argues
that the question of provenance is at the heart of the problem—whereas
earlier versions of the “Silmarillion” material contain some statement
of their supposed authorship or attribution (Rúmil, Eriol, Ælfwine, or
someone else), no such explicit framework was created for The Silmarillion, hence many readers’ sense of confusion when confronted with the
“Ainulindalë,” “Valaquenta,” and “Quenta Silmarillion,” “Akallabêth,”
and “Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age.”
Agøy tackles the difficult question of general approach as well—are
the tales told from a “Mannish” perspective or from an Elvish viewpoint?
As Agøy demonstrates, Tolkien himself struggled with the problem of
viewpoint and provenance, ultimately discarding “both Ælfwine and the
notion that the ‘Silmarillion’ material was almost purely Elvish” (161)
because he was unable to reconcile the text’s inaccurate astronomical
concepts with twentieth-century facts. Agøy’s conclusion, that the “lost
text” approach does not work for The Silmarillion and that it should be
read “without trying to place it with Ælfwine or Bilbo or Pengolod or
Rúmil or Númenórean or Gondorian loremasters” (161), makes perfect
sense.
I’ve saved Michael Drout’s revelatory essay, “Reflections on Thirty
Years of Reading The Silmarillion,” for last because my reaction to it is
complicated. Drout’s lucid, intelligent prose, free from academic jargon
and unnecessarily convoluted syntax, is always a pleasure. The fact that288
Book Reviews
he chose to present a tight, cogent argument for nostalgia as an effective
literary technique and frame it within his own memoir is noteworthy—
the fact that it works so well is even more remarkable.
Reading this essay sent me back to my own “Silmarillion moment” in
1977. Confined at home with a newborn and a raging case of post-partum blues, I embraced the lofty misery of The Silmarillion with my heart
and soul, devouring Tolkien’s majestic prose and weeping aloud at the
tragic beauty of it all—the book was epic in the grandest way and has
remained so emotionally imprinted in my psyche that to this day I cannot
read “Thus fell the High King of the Noldor; and they beat him into the
dust with their maces, and his banner, blue and silver, they trod into the
mire of his blood” (S 194) without a lump in my throat.
Drout’s understanding of how and why nostalgia works to create the
overwhelming sense of loss and longing that permeates The Silmarillion
carries added weight when couched in his own experience of these emotions as a young reader. As he so aptly demonstrates, for each small ray of
light penetrating the unrelenting grief of the so-called “Great Tales,” a
dark result is waiting—what goes up must come down, sometimes much
further down. And yet, as unlikely as it seems, this experience of loss
or embracing the knowledge that things will never be the same again is
precisely what Tolkien used to create high literature—in Drout’s words,
“making loss and longing into art” (36).
Drout’s discussion of Tolkien’s aesthetic technique approaches The
Silmarillion from two perspectives: the big picture (“the epic sweep of
darkness and the heroic resistance to it”) and “the beautiful passages”
down at the sentence level. Time and again, sweetness and light are tempered by the bitter darkness in the rise and fall of Tolkien’s diction—
Drout’s example is a passage that stopped me in my tracks the first time
I read it, and it still does: “Thus King Finrod Felagund, fairest and most
beloved of the house of Finwë, redeemed his oath; but Beren mourned
beside him in despair” (42). And as Drout explains, Tolkien’s transformative art takes this one step further and allows the despair to create a
sense of painful beauty: Finrod’s burial mound remains green and inviolate. Time and again throughout The Silmarillion, Drout explains, we
encounter the “but”—that “undercutting of the victory”—as well as the
“and yet” which tempers the darkness with yellow flowers growing on
a burial mound. When this “pattern of building and loss, triumph and
fall, beauty and wreckage” that permeates The Silmarillion gets under the
skin, we are “ripe,” to use Drout’s term, for the “ache of nostalgia” (48).
It is, Drout concludes, what seems to “lie beneath all of human history,”
from personal, individual tragedies to the sweep of nations. Which goes
a long way toward explaining why The Silmarillion moves some of us the
way it does.289
Book Reviews
As you can see, I’m very favorably impressed by the offerings of
The Silmarillion: Thirty Years On. Its technical faults (another proofreading
round for typos would have been advised) are small, and its contributions
to Tolkien scholarship are considerable. Each of the authors in the volume has valuable ideas for readers to draw on and perhaps carry further.
The book confirms that, even after three decades, the importance of
Christopher Tolkien’s first attempt at bringing his father’s astonishing
subcreated world to light has not dimmed with the years.
ANNE C. PETTY
CRAWFORDVILLE, FLORIDA
Tolkien, Race and Cultural History: From Fairies to Hobbits, by Dimitra Fimi.
Basingstoke, Hampshire, and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009. xvi,
240 pp. £50.00 / $85.00 (hardcover) ISBN 9780230219519.
Tolkien, Race and Cultural History: From Fairies to Hobbits is the product of
Dimitra Fimi’s extended academic interest in the development of Tolkien’s writings. Fimi is a lecturer at the University of Cardiff and has been
teaching courses on the professor’s work for several years. She has also
published various articles on Tolkien, some of which have been re-used
for two of the chapters.
The basic approach of the study is biographical-historical. Fimi links
events from the professor’s life and times with the growth and transformation of what is usually referred to as Tolkien’s legendarium. She establishes three main foci, which correspond to the three main parts of the
book: Part I discusses Tolkien’s concept of fairies/elves; Part II looks at
his imaginary languages and his theory of language aesthetic; and Part
III analyses the effects that his published fiction (predominantly The Hobbit) had on the further development of the legendarium.
Fimi proceeds in all three parts in a similar manner. First she presents
the relevant published (or accessible) material from Tolkien’s writings
and, to a lesser extent, also drawings and paintings. She then goes on to
discuss the contemporary opinions and theories on the topic and finally
works out the relevance of these elements for the inception and further
development of Tolkien’s work.
The discussion of fairies/elves starts with some of the early poems
(e.g. “Wood-sunshine,” “Goblin Feet,” “Kortirion among the Trees,” “An
Evening in Tavrobel,”). The fairies/elves (Tolkien predominantly used
the term “fairy”) in these early pieces are still very much indebted to the
Victorian and Edwardian folk-tradition, which presents them as sprites
of diminutive size. The discussion of the fairy tradition up to Tolkien’s
time offers the reader a well-written and informative introduction to the289
Book Reviews
As you can see, I’m very favorably impressed by the offerings of
The Silmarillion: Thirty Years On. Its technical faults (another proofreading
round for typos would have been advised) are small, and its contributions
to Tolkien scholarship are considerable. Each of the authors in the volume has valuable ideas for readers to draw on and perhaps carry further.
The book confirms that, even after three decades, the importance of
Christopher Tolkien’s first attempt at bringing his father’s astonishing
subcreated world to light has not dimmed with the years.
ANNE C. PETTY
CRAWFORDVILLE, FLORIDA
Tolkien, Race and Cultural History: From Fairies to Hobbits, by Dimitra Fimi.
Basingstoke, Hampshire, and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009. xvi,
240 pp. £50.00 / $85.00 (hardcover) ISBN 9780230219519.
Tolkien, Race and Cultural History: From Fairies to Hobbits is the product of
Dimitra Fimi’s extended academic interest in the development of Tolkien’s writings. Fimi is a lecturer at the University of Cardiff and has been
teaching courses on the professor’s work for several years. She has also
published various articles on Tolkien, some of which have been re-used
for two of the chapters.
The basic approach of the study is biographical-historical. Fimi links
events from the professor’s life and times with the growth and transformation of what is usually referred to as Tolkien’s legendarium. She establishes three main foci, which correspond to the three main parts of the
book: Part I discusses Tolkien’s concept of fairies/elves; Part II looks at
his imaginary languages and his theory of language aesthetic; and Part
III analyses the effects that his published fiction (predominantly The Hobbit) had on the further development of the legendarium.
Fimi proceeds in all three parts in a similar manner. First she presents
the relevant published (or accessible) material from Tolkien’s writings
and, to a lesser extent, also drawings and paintings. She then goes on to
discuss the contemporary opinions and theories on the topic and finally
works out the relevance of these elements for the inception and further
development of Tolkien’s work.
The discussion of fairies/elves starts with some of the early poems
(e.g. “Wood-sunshine,” “Goblin Feet,” “Kortirion among the Trees,” “An
Evening in Tavrobel,”). The fairies/elves (Tolkien predominantly used
the term “fairy”) in these early pieces are still very much indebted to the
Victorian and Edwardian folk-tradition, which presents them as sprites
of diminutive size. The discussion of the fairy tradition up to Tolkien’s
time offers the reader a well-written and informative introduction to the290
Book Reviews
predominant concepts. Fimi traces the diminutive size of the fairies back
to Shakespeare’s sprites that may constitute, next to Michael Drayton’s
creations, the major models for all the diminutive beings of later centuries. She deals with fairies in A Midsummer Night’s Dream and The Tempest
yet does not mention the Queen Mab sequence from Romeo and Juliet,
which might be due to the fact that the main focus is on the Victorian and
Edwardian depictions of fairies—in poetry as well as pictorial art and
drama. Modern readers are most likely familiar with the tiny Tinker Bell
(from Peter Pan), a typical product of the “diminishing process” and more
or less contemporary with Tolkien’s early poems. Fimi also provides a
brief overview of the rather confusing and confused terminology (goblin,
fairy, sprite, elf, etc.), which is, to some extent, also reflected in Tolkien’s
early work. Even the professor needed some time to work out the exact
differences between the various categories of beings, and traces of the
initial “confusion” can be still found in The Hobbit, where “goblin” and
“orc” occur side by side as synonyms.
The material analyzed and the conclusions drawn in this section are
coherently and clearly presented albeit not really new. This is not Fimi’s
fault but rather due to inaccessibility of the unpublished fiction and poetry. Some of the early material has been edited in the volumes of The
History of Middle-earth, yet the full text of “Wood-sunshine,” which
Humphrey Carpenter had obviously been able to read in its entirety, remains unpublished. Fimi, like any other reader, has to rely on the passages quoted in Carpenter’s biography. This state of affairs may not bother
those who use the new criticism method, i.e. who focus on the published
text of a work and interpret it without recourse to biographical or historical information. However, Fimi has explicitly chosen a different procedure and is thus hampered by these restrictions. Further potential pitfalls
of such an approach become evident later on when she relies on the text
of “On Fairy-stories” as published in The Monsters and the Critics. Verlyn
Flieger and Douglas Anderson’s edition of the various drafts (published
as Tolkien On Fairy-stories), which shows that some of the key concepts and
ideas were obviously not yet extant in the early versions, came out too
late for consideration. In the case of Fimi’s study, there is, luckily, no (or
only very little) damage done, yet such instances raise troubling questions
concerning the textual status of the other essays used (“A Secret Vice,”
one manuscript c. 1931, revisions c. 1951; “English and Welsh,” lecture
given 1955, printed 1963, several drafts). The manuscripts and drafts of
these essays are, together with additional notes, available at the Bodleian,
but no critical editions exist as yet. As a consequence, scholars must be
careful when discussing the possible influence of these “theoretical” texts
in their published versions on Tolkien’s (earlier) fictional writings.
At the end of the discussion of fairies in Victorian and Edwardian291
Book Reviews
times, the reader cannot but agree with Fimi’s convincingly argued and
illustrated conclusion that Tolkien’s early writings are “‘in character’
when viewed within the context of the Victorian and Edwardian fascination with fairies” (39). Her survey of the late nineteenth and early
twentieth century traditions concerning fairies constitutes an important
contribution to Tolkien studies. Previously the focus had been mainly on
the medieval inspirations for the “later” elves (e.g., by Tom Shippey), and
a full and coherent study of the more or less contemporary context had
been missing.
The development of Tolkienian fairies away from the contemporary
“sprites with antennae” towards the more grandiose concept of “heroic
elves” is the topic of her next chapter. Fimi identifies three points of
interest that are responsible for shaping the future elves: 1) the metaphysical question as to how the fairies/elves are part of God’s creation,
2) the idea of making them the link between the ancient lost mythology
of England and contemporary folklore, and 3) the decision to establish
them as the speakers of Qenya. The information made available in The
History of Middle-earth provides the basis for this knowledgeably argued
chapter, yet Fimi also takes into consideration some of the non-legendarium works such as The Father Christmas Letters to further strengthen her
argument. As she is able to illustrate convincingly, it is mainly the creative
tension between the fairies as part of a lost “mythology of England” on
the one hand, and their metaphysical status as part of God’s creation on
the other, that is responsible for the further development of the legendarium.
The second part of the book, comprising chapters five to seven, discusses Tolkien’s linguistic work, i.e. his invented languages as well as his
theories of “phonetic fitness” and “linguistic aesthetic.” Fimi starts with
an important observation: basic elements of Tolkien’s legendarium had
been in existence before or independent of Qenya—and challenges all
who have too readily given credence to Tolkien’s famous (though certainly somewhat exaggerated) characterisation of his literary work as
being “linguistic in inspiration.” Basing her analysis mainly on the two
lectures “English and Welsh” and “A Secret Vice,” Fimi then summarises
Tolkien’s ideas on language and aesthetics and succinctly outlines the
main linguistic theories on this topic. Attention is also paid to such artistic-literary movements as Dadaism and Velimir Khlebnikov’s soundsymbolic language “zaum.” Again, it becomes clear that Tolkien was not
so much an erratic (and heretic) block in the linguistic landscape, but
that he rather belonged to a strong minority group of dissenters (such
as Edward Sapir and Otto Jespersen) who were, to varying degrees, opposed to the reigning Saussurean paradigm. Tolkien’s attempts at creating alphabets for his invented languages (be they runic or otherwise) also292
Book Reviews
reflect contemporary (and much older) efforts at spelling-reforms and the
creation of “ideal” alphabets that would re-establish a one-to-one correspondence between letter/symbol and sound. Fimi’s discussion of this
rather specialized topic is always clear and dispenses with any unnecessary jargon. It is one of the strengths of this book that the author is able
to combine the work of specialists in the relevant fields (e.g. Umberto
Eco, Olga Pombo or Marina Yaguello in matters of invented “ideal”
languages) with that of Tolkien scholars and her own ideas. The result
is a study with academic qualities yet which can be also enjoyed by the
general reader.
There is, however, a gap in Fimi’s coverage of the relevant secondary
literature on this very topic—which is to be blamed on the lengthy production process in publishing her work. Many of the topics Fimi covers
in this chapter on “linguistic aesthetic” have also been discussed by Ross
Smith—first in his article ‘Fitting Sense to Sound: Linguistic Aesthetics and Phonosemantics in the Work of J.R.R. Tolkien’ (Tolkien Studies 3,
2006) and more significantly in his book Inside Language: Linguistic and Aesthetic Theory in Tolkien (2007). Fimi’s typescript had been submitted before
Smith’s book was published and it was not possible to alter the chapter
in question. (On the strong and weak points of Smith’s study, see Jason
Fisher’s thorough review in Mythlore 103/104, and also Fimi’s own review of the book in Tolkien Studies 5.) Fimi will wish to take into consideration Smith’s ideas in a future edition of her study (where the inevitable
remaining typos, etc., may also be cleaned up for good). Maybe, too,
some of the out-of-the way (yet topical) publications can be considered,
such as Alex Lewis and Elizabeth Currie’s The Uncharted Realms of Tolkien
(2002) on the contemporary influences on Tolkien, or relevant articles in
foreign languages, such as Dieter Bachmann and Thomas Honegger on
race, blood and hereditary memory, or Laurent Alibert’s application of
Georges Dumézil’s theory of the three Indo-European estates onto some
of Tolkien’s categorisations of people (Tolkien knew Dumézil and his
work). Yet these latter items are desiderata of a specialist and their absence in the present work is of no relevance for Fimi’s overall argument
or the value of her study for the general reader.
The third and final part of the book, then, discusses the impact of
Tolkien’s publication of his literary fiction (especially The Hobbit) on the
further development of his legendarium. Tolkien’s efforts to harmonise
the various parts of his creative work (language invention, literary fiction, mythological writings) have been discussed by scholars before Fimi;
however, she is, to my knowledge, the first to stress the great importance
of the fact that, with the publication of The Hobbit in 1937, a fixed point
existed. The fluid and changing matter of the legendarium now has to
be brought into accordance with the narrative fiction of The Hobbit and,293
Book Reviews
later on, The Lord of the Rings, and the novelistic style of the latter heralds
the transition from the mythological to a historical discourse. This new
focus on history brings to the fore questions concerning the origin of
Men, their subdivisions and racial specification. Fimi again offers a very
helpful exploration of contemporary theories on race (and, incidentally,
on language) and on Tolkien’s position—as far as it can be established
with certainty. Here, the biographical-historical approach of the book
shows its strength to the full. Instead of an anachronistic, post-modern,
post-WW II evaluation, Fimi gives a balanced and valuable presentation
of Tolkien’s position(s) from within the spirit of the time, so to speak. She
also shows how contemporary events find their repercussions in Tolkien’s
attempts to link the “pre-historic” cultures of, for example, Númenor,
Gondor and Rohan, to historical models—and the problems and complications that such an attempt created.
Fimi’s study is well worth reading for the specialist as well as (or even
more so) for the general reader. The author brings together (often for the
first time) relevant research from cultural history and lays out her arguments fair and square. The Tolkien scholar may miss some of the more
exotic publications on some of the topics discussed, but this can be seen
as part of the overall strength of the book: it keeps to the middle road
of academia and does not loses itself in a wild-goose chase for comprehensiveness, nor does it try to push any monomythic interpretation of
Tolkien’s work. Fimi’s approach is subtler, and yet it forces us to reconsider some well-beloved clichés. Thus, it will no longer be possible to talk
naïvely about the linguistic inspiration of Tolkien’s fiction without adding at least some qualifying remarks. Whether Tolkien really intended
to use his (artistically and commercially) successful literary output as a
post festum justification of his work on invented languages may have to
be investigated further—Fimi’s book has given us some answers but has
also opened up some avenues for future research. What more can we ask
for?
THOMAS HONEGGER
FRIEDRICH-SCHILLER-UNIVERSITÄT
JENA, GERMANY
WORKS CITED
Alibert, Laurent. “L’influence indo-européenne en Arda et ses limites”
in Tolkien, Trente Ans Après (1973-2003) (2004), ed. Vincent Ferré:
117-136.
Bachmann, Dieter, and Thomas Honegger. “Ein Mythos für das 20.Jahrhundert: Blut, Rasse und Erbgedächtnis bei Tolkien,” Hither
Shore 2 (2005): 13-39.294
Book Reviews
Fimi, Dimitra. [book review, Inside Language (2007) by Ross Smith], Tolkien
Studies 5 (2008): 229-233.
Fisher, Jason. [book review, Inside Language (2007) by Ross Smith], Mythlore
27 no. 1/2 (whole no. 103/104; Fall/Winter 2008): 172-176.
Tolkien’s “The Lord of the Rings”: Sources of Inspiration, edited by Stratford
Caldecott and Thomas Honegger. Zurich and Jena: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. [vi], 242 pp. $25.00 / £12.60 (trade paperback) ISBN
9783905703122. Cormarë Series No. 18.
In the Foreword to the Second Edition of The Lord of the Rings, J.R.R.
Tolkien attempted, emphatically and ultimately unsuccessfully, to shape
the reception of his masterpiece and, in so doing, to mute discussion of
its motive, meaning, and sources. In his now-famous words: “I should
like to say something here with reference to the many opinions or guesses
that I have received or have read concerning the motives and meaning of
the tale. The prime motive was the desire of a tale-teller to try his hand
at a really long story that would hold the attention of readers, amuse
them, delight them, and at times maybe excite them or deeply move
them. . . . As for any inner meaning or ‘message’, it has in the intention
of the author none. It is neither allegorical nor topical. . . . Its sources are
things long before in mind, or in some cases already written . . . ” (FR,
Foreword, 6).
That the author was unconvincing and unsuccessful in this attempt is
no surprise. The result of this failure, we know, has been the development
of scholarship on Tolkien. Stratford Caldecott and Thomas Honegger’s
collection contributes to a growing scholarly tradition and thereby participates in a larger shaping of the critical appreciation of, and exegetical
approaches to, The Lord of the Rings. Many of these ten essays result from
a Tolkien Studies conference held in 2006 at Exeter College, Oxford.
Caldecott, in his Introduction, characterizes the conference as a sign of
“the ‘coming of age’ of Tolkien Studies” (5) and finds significance in
the fact that it was held at Tolkien’s former college at the initiative of
the Rector, Frances Cairncross. Completing the circuit from Tolkien’s
student days to the current day is indeed noteworthy. Especially when
viewed against the backdrop of the political, social, and economic realities of the intellectual and collegiate world, the imprimatur of Exeter on
a Tolkien conference does in fact signify a milestone for the field.
The evolution of critical appreciation for Tolkien that Caldecott
sketches is significant in the current moment. Indeed, a new generation
of literary critics is focused on Tolkien; the learning and scholarship294
Book Reviews
Fimi, Dimitra. [book review, Inside Language (2007) by Ross Smith], Tolkien
Studies 5 (2008): 229-233.
Fisher, Jason. [book review, Inside Language (2007) by Ross Smith], Mythlore
27 no. 1/2 (whole no. 103/104; Fall/Winter 2008): 172-176.
Tolkien’s “The Lord of the Rings”: Sources of Inspiration, edited by Stratford
Caldecott and Thomas Honegger. Zurich and Jena: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. [vi], 242 pp. $25.00 / £12.60 (trade paperback) ISBN
9783905703122. Cormarë Series No. 18.
In the Foreword to the Second Edition of The Lord of the Rings, J.R.R.
Tolkien attempted, emphatically and ultimately unsuccessfully, to shape
the reception of his masterpiece and, in so doing, to mute discussion of
its motive, meaning, and sources. In his now-famous words: “I should
like to say something here with reference to the many opinions or guesses
that I have received or have read concerning the motives and meaning of
the tale. The prime motive was the desire of a tale-teller to try his hand
at a really long story that would hold the attention of readers, amuse
them, delight them, and at times maybe excite them or deeply move
them. . . . As for any inner meaning or ‘message’, it has in the intention
of the author none. It is neither allegorical nor topical. . . . Its sources are
things long before in mind, or in some cases already written . . . ” (FR,
Foreword, 6).
That the author was unconvincing and unsuccessful in this attempt is
no surprise. The result of this failure, we know, has been the development
of scholarship on Tolkien. Stratford Caldecott and Thomas Honegger’s
collection contributes to a growing scholarly tradition and thereby participates in a larger shaping of the critical appreciation of, and exegetical
approaches to, The Lord of the Rings. Many of these ten essays result from
a Tolkien Studies conference held in 2006 at Exeter College, Oxford.
Caldecott, in his Introduction, characterizes the conference as a sign of
“the ‘coming of age’ of Tolkien Studies” (5) and finds significance in
the fact that it was held at Tolkien’s former college at the initiative of
the Rector, Frances Cairncross. Completing the circuit from Tolkien’s
student days to the current day is indeed noteworthy. Especially when
viewed against the backdrop of the political, social, and economic realities of the intellectual and collegiate world, the imprimatur of Exeter on
a Tolkien conference does in fact signify a milestone for the field.
The evolution of critical appreciation for Tolkien that Caldecott
sketches is significant in the current moment. Indeed, a new generation
of literary critics is focused on Tolkien; the learning and scholarship295
Book Reviews
underlying Tolkien’s project is generally acknowledged; the journal in
which this review appears bears the scholarly stamp of a university press.
A number of very high-quality scholarly publications on Tolkien have
appeared over the course of the last two decades and more; among the
best of these have been produced by the editors and contributors to this
very journal. Still, it may be early to claim a coming of age. Such publications could be more common; and the list of scholars could be longer.
Taking these latter factors into account, it is fair to say that the field is established but that it remains nascent. Only time will tell if it will blossom
and endure. There are good reasons to be optimistic, of course. The field
has excellent material to work with and a strong base of scholars; still, it
has its limits and weaknesses both foreseeable and unforeseen.
Some of these limits and weaknesses are present in this volume,
and they make themselves apparent in subtle ways from the cover art,
through some of the essays, and on to the final credits. In general, I believe they arise from and contribute to an unresolved tension in the field:
Many of us—most of us? all of us?—came to Tolkien Studies because
his work succeeded exactly as the author intended. It held our attention,
it amused us, delighted us, and at times maybe excited or deeply moved
us. Hence the question, and the tension: is it possible to bracket this kind
of affection for the work and the author and, from there, to apply the
kind of dispassionate critical perspective to his text that the norms of
scholarship require? If it is possible, one might further ask, is it desirable? Is it beneficial? Is it even necessary? I am not sure of the answer
to these questions. One answer, my own, is that, unless this kind of affection intrudes on one’s willingness to critique Tolkien and to critique
other scholars of Tolkien, it should be considered beneficial. Scholarship
infused by passion for the subject is a good thing. At its best, that is what
I believe Tolkien Studies can be and ought to be. But it needs to get past
a few things. Scholars need to get past being worried about studying and
enjoying a work that other critics have frankly not enjoyed and have chosen
not to study. They need to get past concerns about self-legitimacy, past
the very kinds of anxieties that one discerns in expressions related to the
field’s status, such as Caldecott’s comment on its “coming of age.”
In brief, the field needs to focus on the serious work of scholarship
itself, for it is the quality of the scholarship that will be most convincing
over time. Tolkien Studies needs to continue to demonstrate that it does
as other fields do: it situates its subject; creates and disseminates new
knowledge; reinforces and affirms foundational knowledge; shares conflicting opinions; challenges assumptions and develops new ones; seeks
out new critical perspectives and approaches; inspires future research directions; and broadens the impact of critical discoveries. If scholarship in
any field does not do these things, then it risks becoming the monotonous296
Book Reviews
domain of the already converted, and thus meaningless and inconsequential to those beyond the inner circle. To its credit, this volume does
contain a number of very powerful essays. They advance our knowledge,
reinforce foundational information, situate Tolkien historically and intellectually, provide new critical approaches to his texts and inspire new
directions. The book also contains some arguably inconsequential essays,
and, at times, struggles to make the connection between the promise of
its title—sources of inspiration—and its full content.
The volume is divided into three sections: Part One—Biographical;
Part Two—Mythos and Modernity; and, Part Three—Mythos and Logos. The first part is clearly the strongest of the three. It contains excellent essays by John Garth and Verlyn Flieger and an enlightening entry
by Peter Gilliver, Edmund Weiner, and Jeremy Marshall, all editors on
the Oxford English Dictionary. Garth’s essay, “Tolkien, Exeter College, and
the Great War,” satisfyingly extends and amplifies knowledge and insights from his very fine book, Tolkien and the Great War (2003). Readers of
this piece will enjoy a kind of insider’s view on Tolkien’s time at Exeter,
one that is infused by intimacy and buttressed by detail, depth, and documentation. It will not surprise anyone that Tolkien enjoyed company and
language. He did not, however, possess or practice habits associated with
the best student. He founded a society that was playful in spirit, slightly
intellectually subversive, characterized by the importance of male companionship and defined by a love of literature and learning. He was
President of the Stapeldon Society, failed at Classics, was once described
by the Sub-Rector at Exeter as “v. lazy” but, inspired by Edith Bratt,
eventually became disciplined, switched to English and finished successfully. Those, at least, are the outlines of Garth’s portrait of Tolkien at
Exeter. To say more would be unfair to Garth’s essay, which should be
read in its entirety. Suffice it to say that any future discussion of Tolkien’s
biography will want to draw on Garth’s research on his life at Exeter or
be considered incomplete.
The Gilliver, Weiner and Marshall chapter offers an excellent glimpse
of Tolkien as a lexicographer and philologist. The extended riff, in Gilliver’s section, on Tolkien’s “ability to make a task take longer than expected”—in reference to his association with a Chaucer volume for Oxford
University Press (begun in 1922 and ended, inconclusively, in 1960)—is
particularly gratifying. The Weiner section offers illuminating research
on how “apparently dry, dull, and uninspired linguistic items” and texts
that are not compelling for their imaginative quality fired Tolkien’s creative imagination and gave him sources for important names, places, and
terms in his lexicon, such as Brand, Hammerhand, Oliphaunt, Orc, Hollin, Treebeard, Warg, Mirkwood, and eleventy. Marshall’s section is notable for its review of Tolkien’s use of the plural “dwarves” and provides297
Book Reviews
valuable commentary on the usage patterns of that peculiar morphology
prior to and subsequent to Tolkien. Scholars researching Tolkien and
language will almost certainly want to include this essay among their
references in future work.
Paraphrasing Tolkien himself, the most disappointing feature of Verlyn Flieger’s essay “Gilson, Smith, and Baggins” is its length: at just about
ten pages, it is too short. Still, it represents a brilliant beginning and a
novel insight into the effect of the deaths of dear friends on Tolkien and
into the ways in which the author, through his fiction, found a way to
represent them and “honor the meaning of their lives” (85). For Flieger,
Tolkien created Frodo to give meaning to Gilson’s meaningless death. In
the four hobbits, he “recreated that ‘little complete body,’” known as the
T.C.B.S., that was torn apart by death and war. In doing so, he “reared a
structure ‘to be destroyed that we may regret it’” (92-93). Following this
brief summary, I imagine that other readers will also wish to hear more
from Flieger on this subject. It is my hope that she will continue and
expand what she has done so very well in this brief piece. As it is, the essay could be an excellent feature in an undergraduate or, under the right
circumstances, graduate course on Tolkien.
The second set of essays, organized under the rubric “Mythos and
Modernity,” are promising but, on the whole, not of the same quality
as those in the first section. This reviewer found Patrick Curry’s essay
“Enchantment in Tolkien and Middle-earth” insufficiently developed
and, at times, somewhat lacking in coherence as it shifted from Max Weber to Karen Blixen to Buddha and to Jan Zwicky. His characterization
and discussion of Frodo’s “delight of the living tree itself ” in Lórien as
a “lyric experience” (108) also left me slightly puzzled, not just for the
unexpected focus on lyric, but also for what the analysis omitted, viz.
a discussion of Tolkien’s notion of Recovery and commentary on his
conception of Machine. Marek Oziewicz’s essay “From Vico to Tolkien:
The Affirmation of Myth Against the Tyranny of Reason” is a beneficial
attempt at situating Tolkien’s significance within a larger historical frame
by illustrating parallels between Tolkien and Vico’s careers, works, and
passions, and drawing interesting inferences from each man’s novelty,
academic marginalization, and popular success. In Vico and Tolkien,
Oziewicz sees authors who “offered a viable humanistic philosophical
alternative to the deterministic, hegemonic, and oppressive modernity”
and who “affirmed the value of myth and poetic understanding in the
construction of human individuals and societies” (122). This is a thorough, coherent, and illuminating essay that creates the possibility for future research directions. One could similarly characterize Peter M. Candler, Jr.’s essay “Frodo or Zarathustra: Beyond Nihilism in Tolkien and
Nietzsche.” Candler’s observation that “Tolkien’s world is every bit as298
Book Reviews
anti-Zarathustrian as Nietzsche’s is anti-Christian” (156) is certainly apt
and insightful, though, given the points of comparison, it is less incisive
than Oziewicz’s observations on Tolkien and Vico.
Part three of the volume, “Mythos and Logos,” contains essays by
Leon Pereira, a Dominican friar; Alison, Milbank, a professor of Literature and Theology; and Guglielmo Spirito, a Franciscan friar. These
are followed by a chapter by Stratford Caldecott, one of the volume’s
editors, the organizer of the Oxford conference, and the director of the
Thomas More College Center for Faith and Culture. God, religion, and
faith obviously are important topics in Tolkien Studies, and they should
not be ignored. As Pereira makes plain: “The issue of God and religion
is not peripheral to an understanding of Tolkien and his work. In fact it
is essential. You do not need to be Catholic to understand Tolkien, nor do
you need to believe what he believed in order to grasp his meaning, but
you must understand what he believed in order to appreciate his writings,
especially the world of Middle-earth” (175).
To the extent that this affirms the importance of historical context, culture, and personal biography to the study of an author and/or work, it is a
worthwhile and essentially standard scholarly guidepost. There is no doubt
that Tolkien was a man of deep faith, and that his Catholicism shaped his
identity, his outlook, his worldview, and ultimately his work. He has told us
as much in his own words. In these final essays, many of Tolkien’s letters are
rightly and extensively quoted to provide perspective on his work and religion. On this subject, his well-known letter to Milton Waldman deserves
special attention. In this letter, reprinted as part of the Preface to the
Second Edition of The Silmarillion, Tolkien carved out a space for his
creative work so that it might fill a void he perceived in the history and
mythology of England. He also famously lamented the shortcomings of
Arthurian legend, calling it “imperfectly naturalized, associated with the
soil of Britain but not with English.” He continued, stating that the Arthurian world “does not replace what I felt to be missing. For one thing
its ‘faerie’ is too lavish, and fantastical, incoherent and repetitive. For
another and more important thing: it is involved in, and explicitly contains the Christian religion.” In the next line, starting a new paragraph,
Tolkien said bluntly: “that seems to me fatal. Myth and fairy-story must,
as all art, reflect and contain in solution elements of moral and religious
truth (or error) but not explicit, not in the known form of the primary
‘real’ world” (S xii).
In the light of this comment, reading Caldecott’s claim at the end of
the volume: “I think you can detect a ‘hidden code’ that refers to Catholic themes and ideas, such as the Eucharist and the Blessed Virgin Mary,
in The Lord of the Rings”: this reviewer wondered about the efficacy of a
critical approach that tries to make explicit in Tolkien’s art things that the299
Book Reviews
author expressly believed would be fatal to the art itself. Tolkien could be
explicit about his faith when he wished to be and he did use other means
beyond his fiction to honor that faith and his commitment to it. His letters show that; his Epilogue to “On Fairy-stories” shows that. And his
letter to Milton Waldman clearly demonstrates that, to make art of the
kind he considered worthy of his making, Tolkien believed he should not
explicitly inscribe it with the Christian religion as Arthurian legend so fatally did. There is something, of course, beautiful and moving in Tolkien
that should not be denied or suppressed. And it is hopeful and satisfying
to think that there is a spirit in his fiction that brings readers joy. In this
connection, the essays in part three should be commended for showing
how Tolkien’s own personal inspirations may in turn inspire us as we take
on the “new challenges and new horizons” that Thomas Honegger, in his
concluding essay, predicts for the field (236).
GERALD SEAMAN
RIPON COLLEGE
RIPON, WISCONSIN
Tolkien’s Oxford, by Robert S. Blackham. Stroud, Gloucestershire:
The History Press, 2008. 144p. £12.99 (trade paperback) ISBN
9780752447292.
Of the ancient English universities, Oxford holds a special place in
the public imagination that not even Cambridge (despite its at least equal
academic reputation and its equally historic buildings) can quite match.
This perception probably has some roots in a degree of snobbery, but it
is most evident in literary writings of the last century and a half, from
Gerard Manley Hopkins’ “Towery city, and branchy between towers,”
through such works as Gaudy Night, to Brideshead Revisited and beyond—a
series of nostalgic idylls that help feed the tourist industry of this big
post-industrial city that happens to have a university in the middle. Most
of this literature has been written by those who were students or visitors
there—temporary residents with rosy memories. Those who look rather
more steadily at the city and the university will find that this idyllic picture needs a certain degree of modification. For example, Oxford is not
quite as hospitable or as pleasant as might be thought. In the nineteenth
century, the notorious Master of Balliol, Benjamin Jowett, exemplified
the Oxford attitude; when the equally famous (outside Oxford) Professor
John Stuart Blackie of Edinburgh said, “You mustn’t think too hardly of
us, Master!” Jowett replied, “We don’t think of you at all,” and a modified form of this attitude is still occasionally perceptible. In a different
sense, those getting to grips with the one-way system soon realize that299
Book Reviews
author expressly believed would be fatal to the art itself. Tolkien could be
explicit about his faith when he wished to be and he did use other means
beyond his fiction to honor that faith and his commitment to it. His letters show that; his Epilogue to “On Fairy-stories” shows that. And his
letter to Milton Waldman clearly demonstrates that, to make art of the
kind he considered worthy of his making, Tolkien believed he should not
explicitly inscribe it with the Christian religion as Arthurian legend so fatally did. There is something, of course, beautiful and moving in Tolkien
that should not be denied or suppressed. And it is hopeful and satisfying
to think that there is a spirit in his fiction that brings readers joy. In this
connection, the essays in part three should be commended for showing
how Tolkien’s own personal inspirations may in turn inspire us as we take
on the “new challenges and new horizons” that Thomas Honegger, in his
concluding essay, predicts for the field (236).
GERALD SEAMAN
RIPON COLLEGE
RIPON, WISCONSIN
Tolkien’s Oxford, by Robert S. Blackham. Stroud, Gloucestershire:
The History Press, 2008. 144p. £12.99 (trade paperback) ISBN
9780752447292.
Of the ancient English universities, Oxford holds a special place in
the public imagination that not even Cambridge (despite its at least equal
academic reputation and its equally historic buildings) can quite match.
This perception probably has some roots in a degree of snobbery, but it
is most evident in literary writings of the last century and a half, from
Gerard Manley Hopkins’ “Towery city, and branchy between towers,”
through such works as Gaudy Night, to Brideshead Revisited and beyond—a
series of nostalgic idylls that help feed the tourist industry of this big
post-industrial city that happens to have a university in the middle. Most
of this literature has been written by those who were students or visitors
there—temporary residents with rosy memories. Those who look rather
more steadily at the city and the university will find that this idyllic picture needs a certain degree of modification. For example, Oxford is not
quite as hospitable or as pleasant as might be thought. In the nineteenth
century, the notorious Master of Balliol, Benjamin Jowett, exemplified
the Oxford attitude; when the equally famous (outside Oxford) Professor
John Stuart Blackie of Edinburgh said, “You mustn’t think too hardly of
us, Master!” Jowett replied, “We don’t think of you at all,” and a modified form of this attitude is still occasionally perceptible. In a different
sense, those getting to grips with the one-way system soon realize that300
Book Reviews
if you have business in Oxford you will know your way around, while if
you do not know your way around you have no business being in Oxford.
Moreover, the Town vs. Gown hostility still flourishes, especially on the
Town side. Although university rags are much less antisocial these days
than in the times when the highjacking of a bus by students was a fairly
normal event and upper-class undergraduates were frequently heard
baying for broken glass, students still can get picked on by locals, especially around Carfax on a Saturday night. Hopkins was not so enthralled
as to ignore its underside, when he spoke of the city’s “base and brickish
skirt,” and even the besotted Dorothy L. Sayers found her heroine’s punt
going past the municipal tip. Moreover the university is often seen by its
denizens as less than the ideal academic haven. As Joseph Wright said to
the young Tolkien:
“What do you take Oxford for, lad?” “A university, a place of
learning.” “Nay, lad, it’s a factory! And what’s it making? I’ll
tell you. It’s making fees. Get that into your head, and you’ll
begin to understand what goes on” (Letters 336).
Tolkien however was not a temporary resident, but spent most of his
adult life in Oxford, mainly working; hence the glamour was tempered
by grammar, both in the figurative and literal senses, and mundaneity
played a greater part in his life than either rosy memories (his early nostalgic romantic vision was of Warwick rather than Oxford) or, conversely,
horror stories of snobbery or isolation. He and his family were part of
the everyday life of Oxford—shops, schools, pubs and the like—and had
their very normal place as moderately high-status locals. A great deal has
been written in various places about Tolkien’s everyday life, not least by
Tolkien himself in his letters and elsewhere, and there are various walking tours, real or virtual, of Tolkien-related places in Oxford. All the
same, somewhat surprisingly, the life story and the locations have seldom
if ever been brought together—certainly not in a thorough study.
Until now, that is. Enter Robert Blackham, known to British Tolkienists for his entertaining and informative presentations, particularly at
Oxonmoot, and more widely for his book The Roots of Tolkien’s Middleearth, reviewed by Tom Shippey in Tolkien Studies IV (2007). This latter is
a survey of Tolkien’s connections with Birmingham and district, which is
obviously extremely important for the light it sheds on Tolkien’s formative years, and one would think had been pretty thoroughly covered elsewhere. Despite this, I believe that Blackham’s work breaks new ground,
and does it splendidly, with brief excursions from the Birmingham area
into Worcestershire, Warwick and Oxford. Now he has taken on even
more frequently trodden territory in his new book Tolkien’s Oxford. There
is obviously a great deal of competition here, and readers will no doubt301
Book Reviews
want to know how Blackham stands up to it.
The answer is: very well, in fact, by virtue of doing something different. This is not a guide book, nor strictly speaking a biography. Above all
this, like its predecessor, is a picture book that consists of photographs,
paintings, sketches and maps (all contemporary whenever possible) linked
by a mainly chronological text, often with considerable detail. It begins by
tracing Tolkien’s almost certain steps in December 1910 from the Great
Western Railway station, along Park End Street, past the Castle Mound
on the New Road, past Carfax, along the High Street, down King Edward Street to Merton Street and Corpus Christi, where he would be
resident while sitting his entrance examination. Then there follow the
two routes by road from Birmingham to Oxford, one of which he would
have taken when he was a given a lift in Dickie Reynolds’s motor car
when he went to Exeter College in 1911, together with a route map and
photos of places he is likely to have seen on the way. When he gets to Oxford there is less detail, but still plenty of photos of colleges and houses,
together with places such as the Sheldonian Theatre and the Radcliffe
Camera, and a humorous sketch depicting a “rag,” which shows why
townsfolk in general might have been less than friendly towards students
(incidentally, one of the rioting mob is a dragon; the author wonders if it
would have got a grant). And so it continues, with detailed depictions of
the places where Tolkien lived and worked, worshipped and drank—obviously the Eagle and Child, but also the Lamb and Flag, and the White
Horse (unfortunately Blackham does not repeat here the suggestion he
makes in his previous book, that the inn sign of the White Horse might
have provided inspiration for the Prancing Pony), as well as places with
C.S. Lewis associations, such as Addison’s Walk. Blackham also makes
excursions, for example to the Somme in 1916 (including a map) and
less traumatically to the Rollwright Stones, the Uffington White Horse,
and Wayland’s Smithy. There are also photographs of Wolvercote Cemetery, including one of Humphrey Carpenter’s grave. Tolkien Society
and Mythopoeic Society members will also recognise the Silver Tree and
the Golden Tree in the University Parks, planted by the Societies in 1992
and now looking very impressive. The book finishes with five pages of
suggestions for places to visit.
Apart from the pictures, there is the written commentary, which regrettably is not always of the same high standard. There are a few minor
errors, such as the fact that it was a bus, not a tram, that Tolkien highjacked, at least according to the Scull and Hammond Chronology (46);
and Oxford’s spires are traditionally “dreaming” not “gleaming” (from
Matthew Arnold’s “Thyrsis”). There are also some doubtful statements.
Charles Williams death may well have been a loss to Tolkien, but not
really a “great” one (that was Lewis). Finally, in the introduction, many302
Book Reviews
people will be mildly surprised to learn that Star Wars was inspired by
Tolkien’s work, and more than a few will disagree with the statement
that Peter Jackson “probably used more computing power than a space
agency to produce what Tolkien must have seen in his mind’s eye” (9-10).
And a mild regret: while venturing afield, the author might have visited
one or two of the “Farmer Giles” places, such as Thame (with an h—that
folly without warrant) and Worminghall.
Still, these are very minor blemishes on what is over all a delightful
book. There are all sorts of unexpected details—for example, I have not
mentioned the 1930s advertisement for a Morris-Cowley car that is probably the same make as the family’s old faithful “Jo.” The older photos
also give a fitting sense of time as well as place. Certainly any Tolkienists
visiting Oxford for the first time would be well advised to buy it, and
more experienced Oxford hands will certainly want it for pure nostalgic
enjoyment (and they might even learn something as well).
DAVID DOUGHAN
LONDON, ENGLAND
WORKS CITED
Blackham, Robert S. The Roots of Tolkien’s Middle-earth. Stroud: Tempus,
2006.
Hopkins, Gerard Manley. “Duns Scotus’s Oxford” in Poems. London:
Humphrey Milford, 1918.
Sayers, Dorothy L. Gaudy Night. London: Gollancz, 1935.
Scull, Christina and Hammond, Wayne G. The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion
and Guide: Chronology. London: Harper Collins, 2006.
Waugh, Evelyn. Brideshead Revisited. London: Chapman and Hall, 1945.
Tolkien’s Shorter Works: Proceedings of the 4th Seminar of the Deutsche Tolkien
Gesellschaft & Walking Tree Publishers Decennial Conference, edited by Margaret Hiley and Frank Weinreich. Zurich and Jena: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. [8], vi, 352 pp. $22.70 / £11.60 (trade paperback) ISBN
9783905703115. Cormarë Series no. 17.
This volume brings together sixteen essays first presented at a May
2007 conference held at Friedrich Schiller University in Jena, jointly
sponsored by Walking Tree Publishers (in celebration of their tenth
anniversary) and the German Tolkien Society (Deutsche Tolkien Gesellschaft). The focus of both conference and collection is on Tolkien’s
shorter, lesser-known works, which the editors note have been unfairly302
Book Reviews
people will be mildly surprised to learn that Star Wars was inspired by
Tolkien’s work, and more than a few will disagree with the statement
that Peter Jackson “probably used more computing power than a space
agency to produce what Tolkien must have seen in his mind’s eye” (9-10).
And a mild regret: while venturing afield, the author might have visited
one or two of the “Farmer Giles” places, such as Thame (with an h—that
folly without warrant) and Worminghall.
Still, these are very minor blemishes on what is over all a delightful
book. There are all sorts of unexpected details—for example, I have not
mentioned the 1930s advertisement for a Morris-Cowley car that is probably the same make as the family’s old faithful “Jo.” The older photos
also give a fitting sense of time as well as place. Certainly any Tolkienists
visiting Oxford for the first time would be well advised to buy it, and
more experienced Oxford hands will certainly want it for pure nostalgic
enjoyment (and they might even learn something as well).
DAVID DOUGHAN
LONDON, ENGLAND
WORKS CITED
Blackham, Robert S. The Roots of Tolkien’s Middle-earth. Stroud: Tempus,
2006.
Hopkins, Gerard Manley. “Duns Scotus’s Oxford” in Poems. London:
Humphrey Milford, 1918.
Sayers, Dorothy L. Gaudy Night. London: Gollancz, 1935.
Scull, Christina and Hammond, Wayne G. The J.R.R. Tolkien Companion
and Guide: Chronology. London: Harper Collins, 2006.
Waugh, Evelyn. Brideshead Revisited. London: Chapman and Hall, 1945.
Tolkien’s Shorter Works: Proceedings of the 4th Seminar of the Deutsche Tolkien
Gesellschaft & Walking Tree Publishers Decennial Conference, edited by Margaret Hiley and Frank Weinreich. Zurich and Jena: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. [8], vi, 352 pp. $22.70 / £11.60 (trade paperback) ISBN
9783905703115. Cormarë Series no. 17.
This volume brings together sixteen essays first presented at a May
2007 conference held at Friedrich Schiller University in Jena, jointly
sponsored by Walking Tree Publishers (in celebration of their tenth
anniversary) and the German Tolkien Society (Deutsche Tolkien Gesellschaft). The focus of both conference and collection is on Tolkien’s
shorter, lesser-known works, which the editors note have been unfairly303
Book Reviews
overshadowed by his longer, better-known works such as The Hobbit, The
Lord of the Rings, and The Silmarillion. Their goal, therefore, is to call attention to these works and show that they are more substantial and significant than has been generally realized—their thesis, in brief, being “that
‘short’ these works may be but ‘minor’ they are not” (iv–v).
This is a fine plan, and the proceedings’ contents range widely among
the works in question. Smith of Wootton Major proves to be the most popular topic, being the focus of six essays; the other works considered here
include Farmer Giles of Ham (four essays), “Leaf by Niggle” (three), “On
Fairy-stories” (two, although others cite it), The Adventures of Tom Bombadil
(with one essay devoted to the collection as a whole and four more to
single poems within it), and single essays looking at The Homecoming of
Beorthnoth, Roverandom, “Ides Ælfscyne” (one of the Songs for the Philologists), “Bilbo’s Last Song,” and “Mythopoeia”. 2 Wholly absent are The
Father Christmas Letters (in either their original or revised and expanded
form), Mr. Bliss, “The Lay of Aotrou and Itroun,” or “Imram.” The
contributors’ European perspective offers the chance for fresh views on
mostly well-known material, and the collection’s concept allows its contributors to range widely—I cannot recall, for example, seeing any critical work on Roverandom since it originally appeared a decade ago, while
“Mythopoeia,” “Ides Ælfscyne,” and “Bilbo’s Last Song” have suffered
similar neglect. That said, it must be observed that, despite the claim in
the introduction that “each contribution was carefully proof-read” (v),
the volume is somewhat editorially lax. Most notably, my copy had the
wrong back cover text, giving a blurb describing The Silmarillion Thirty
Years On, another book Walking Tree released at about the same time;3
native English speakers will also be struck by the occasional unidiomatic
word choice.
It is disappointing that a collection devoted to remedying the relative
lack of attention that has been paid to Tolkien’s minor works should itself
in its introduction make no mention of the two major previous attempts
to deal with these works: Paul Kocher’s pioneering work (the sixty-page
chapter “Seven Leaves”) in Master of Middle-earth (1972) and the Tolkien
Society’s Leaves from the Tree: J.R.R. Tolkien’s Shorter Fiction (1991), with contributions by Tom Shippey, Christina Scull, Charles Noad, and others. A
number of the individual essays herein quote from Kocher, and several
more draw on pieces in Leaves from the Tree; recognition of their significance in Hiley and Weinreich’s introduction would have helped place
this volume within the larger context of Tolkien criticism as a whole.
The volume also unfortunately lacks any index, making cross-reference
between the individual essays difficult.
As for the essays, Allan Turner’s “‘Tom Bombadil’: Poetry and Accretion” looks at how Tolkien incorporated a disparate group of mostly304
Book Reviews
pre-existing poems into the world of The Lord of the Rings, primarily by
the framing device of the preface to The Adventures of Tom Bombadil. Turner is excellent on the importance of “apparently unnecessary detail” in
Tolkien’s world-building (10), and for his observation that Tolkien’s first
published poem, “The Battle of the Eastern Field,” can be said to set
the pattern for his poetry as a whole (5). Turner also does a good job of
tracing how a single poem changed over time to gradually become incorporated within the mythology (8–9)—although perversely he chooses
a poem (“The Horns of Ylmir”) not included in The Adventures of Tom
Bombadil. But his failure to even address the issue of why Tolkien included
and excluded the pieces he did from among those available, and his division of all sixteen poems into six more or less arbitrary categories,4greatly
weaken his piece. Ultimately, his topic proves to be too large for a single
essay, and he ranges over the ground rather than delving into the heart of
his thesis; it is to be hoped he will return to the topic at some future point
and deal with it in greater depth.
By contrast, Guglielmo Spirito’s “Speaking With Animals: A Desire
that Lies Near the Heart of Faërie” is really a homily rather than an
essay, offering a sort of impassioned meditation on the connectedness
of all living things rather than advancing a rational argument. Spirito
links Tolkien’s famous comment in “On Fairy-stories” about the desire
for communication with all things to observations by naturalists and
episodes from saints’ lives as well as examples from Tolkien’s own work
(Farmer Giles of Ham’s Garm, the various creatures in “Bombadil Goes
Boating”).5
The other three essays devoted to Bombadil poems all look at “The
Sea-bell,” generally recognized as perhaps Tolkien’s finest poem, each
in connection with another work. Maria Raffaella Benvenuto’s “Smith
of Wootton Major, ‘The Sea-Bell’ and Lothlórien: Tolkien and the Perils
of Faërie” explores what we might call the Thomas Rhymer theme in
Tolkien’s works, stressing the dangers inherent in any mortal’s contact
with the Otherworld and placing Tolkien’s work into context with earlier
treatments of the theme, both in folk ballads and more modern fare such
as Keats’s “La Belle Dame Sans Merci” and Coleridge’s “The Rime of
the Ancient Mariner.” Anna E. Slack’s far-ranging “A Star Above the
Mast: Tolkien, Faërie and the Great Escape” investigates the roles played
by belief in, and the right attitude towards, Faërie. She rather unusually blends Faith and Faërie, seeing a nun’s withdrawal from the world
(Ancrene Wisse) and a dreamer’s reunion with his dead daughter (Pearl)
as encounters with Faërie parallel to those of Smith and the narrator
of “The Sea-bell”; she even equates Niggle’s time spent painting with
Smith’s journeys into Faery. Margaret Hiley’s “Journeys in the Dark”
argues that both “The Sea-bell” and Smith of Wootton Major represent305
Book Reviews
failed quests, since both feature visitors to Faërie who ultimately return
home without mastering that strange realm. Her claim that Smith, being
mortal, cannot “gain knowledge” by his travels into Faërie seems oddly
to miss the point; surely he “failed” only if one imposes the simple Quest
structure upon the tale, which Tolkien himself did not. I must also note
that at one point Hiley cites Todorov’s The Fantastic but grossly misrepresents Todorov’s position.
Of the four essays centered mainly on Farmer Giles of Ham, Marek
Oziewicz’s “Setting Things Right in Farmer Giles of Ham and The Lord of
the Rings: Tolkien’s Concept of Justice” scores points for originality: I never
expected to see any interpretation of Farmer Giles in terms of the Munich
Crisis (41). Oziewicz uses Giles’s career and the Scouring of the Shire
as demonstrations for what he sees as a specific code of ideal justice that
he believes underlies all mythopoeic fantasy. In the case of Farmer Giles,
he argues that the hero’s assumption of responsibility entitles him to the
royal titles he later claims, while the king’s evasions of responsibility void
his right to rulership. By contrast, in the Scouring of the Shire, he sees
this justice taking the form of “appropriate corrective action” and “deep
respect for life.” Unfortunately, Oziewicz never satisfactorily defines this
“compensational justice,” offering only negative examples and assertion,
nor he does he persuasively link the two halves of his discussion.
Vincent Ferré’s “The Rout of the King: Tolkien’s Readings on Arthurian Kingship—Farmer Giles of Ham and The Homecoming of Beorhtnoth” thinks Tolkien sharply critiques Arthur in oblique ways and finds
Arthurian parallels everywhere in Tolkien’s work, even in the name of
Aragorn’s father (Arathorn > Arathorn > Arthor).6 Ferré’s linkage of
Beorhtnoth, Beowulf, and Arthur in a kind of triumvirate of failed leaders is intriguing, if harsh, but I suspect I’m not the only reader who will
be bemused by his offering up Túrin, of all people, as an example of a
“responsible leader” who “accepts his responsibilities” and “will not act
rashly” (69). Friedhelm Schneidewind’s “Farmer Giles of Ham: the Prototype of a Humorous Dragon Story” provides an interesting overview
of dragon legends and dragon-lore. His treatment of both the humorous and prototypical elements of his thesis is only cursory, and his essay
would have benefited from familiarity with Jonathan Evans’s and Christina Scull’s work on this topic, but I do not think anyone interested in
dragon-lore can read his piece without learning something new7—which
is, after all, one of the major points of scholarship. Patrick Brückner’s
“‘. . . Until the Dragon Comes’: Tolkien’s Dragon-Motif as Poetological
Concept” combines a subtle thesis with a rather muddled presentation,
complete with charts and a Venn diagram. Brückner places great emphasis on the “Edge of the Wild” line on the Wilderland Map in The Hobbit,
first presenting this as a literal demarcation between the realistic world306
Book Reviews
of Bilbo (and the reader) and the fantastic epic world epitomized by The
Dragon, then reversing himself to argue that Tolkien’s relatively realistic
treatment of Smaug undercuts that division and imports a “historical”
element into what might otherwise be a fairy-tale. Perhaps his best point
is to acknowledge the influence of Beowulf ’s dragon upon Smaug while
insisting that here Tolkien greatly improved upon his source (114).
With Thomas Fornet-Ponse’s “Theology and Fairy-Stories: A Theological Reading of Tolkien’s Shorter Works?” the emphasis shifts to “On
Fairy-stories.” Fornet-Ponse explicates Tolkien’s theory, as expressed in
“Mythopoeia,” “On Fairy-stories,” and elsewhere, that human creativity
is the consequence of humanity itself being a creation. He then briefly
applies Tolkien’s prescriptions in “On Fairy-stories” to his own practice
in Roverandom, “Leaf by Niggle,” Farmer Giles of Ham, and Smith of Wootton Major, and seems to doubt whether any of the four fully qualifies as a
fairy-story as Tolkien described it.
The next block of essays deal primarily with “Leaf by Niggle.” Of
these, Bertrand Alliot’s “The ‘Meaning’ of Leaf by Niggle” de-emphasizes
an autobiographical interpretation and instead focuses on the underlying
“laws” of Niggle’s home country which the hapless artist finds so difficult to obey, with an aside near the end to look at the quality of distant
landscapes Niggle seeks to capture. Alliot’s is the most intriguing piece
in the whole collection, but I think few will agree with his conclusions
that Tolkien’s message is that Parish is right and Niggle wrong; that it
is morally wrong to build a painting shed on a patch where one should
grow potatoes; that Tolkien emerged from World War I convinced that
fantasy and poetry were unimportant and “never took his creative work
seriously” again (177–178). In biographical fact the first thing Tolkien
did when he was strong enough to hold a pencil again after leaving the
trenches was to embark full-throttle upon the massive work of creating
his legendarium. Essentially Alliot is one with those who in Tolkien’s “Allegory of the Tower” criticize the Beowulf-poet for “not [restoring] the
old house,” and ignore Tolkien’s final line: But from the top of that tower the
man had been able to look out upon the Sea.
Heidi Steimel’s “The Autobiographical Tolkien” takes a much more
standard approach in her juxtaposition of “Leaf by Niggle” and Smith of
Wootton Major but does it exceptionally well—in fact, I would say this is
the finest autobiographical interpretation of both tales that I have seen,
and the volume’s single best piece. She also deserves praise for stressing
that this is not the only possible approach but rather her own exercise of
“applicability,” and for her conclusion that both tales would still be worth
reading simply as stories, without any autobiographical context. Fabian Geier’s thoughtful “Leaf by Tolkien?[:] Allegory and Biography in
Tolkien’s Literary Theory and Practice” also centers on “applicability,”307
Book Reviews
though Geier’s is a more theoretical piece that looks at the various forms
of allegory and their role—as well as that of source materials (mainly
biographical but also literary)—in Tolkien’s work. Geier offers many insights as well as the occasional provocative statement, such as his belief
that subcreation can be detached from its explicitly Christian roots because it is “essentially more (neo)platonic than genuinely Christian” (225)
or his claim that “Leaf by Niggle” is “incoherent” as a stand-alone story
when deprived of its allegorical content (228).
Like so many other essays here, Martin Simonson’s “Redefining the
Romantic Hero: A Reading of Smith of Wootton Major in the Light of Ludwig Tieck’s Der Runenberg” compares Smith of Wootton Major with another
work; what sets his apart is that he contrasts Smith with an non-Tolkienian work, a German literary fairy tale from 1804. Simonson admits that
there’s no evidence Tolkien ever read Tieck’s story, and unfortunately his
essay fails to establish that either casts any significant light on the other;
“The Sea-bell” might have made a better pairing with Tieck’s tale. Martin Sternberg’s “Smith of Wootton Major Considered as a Religious Text”
also looks outside for explication of a Tolkien text, but rather more successfully; he discusses ways in which Smith’s experiences of Faery parallel those of mystics within the Christian tradition, such as the author of
The Cloud of Unknowing, and does a fine job of bringing the two together.
Other than an apparent determination to use the phrase “ruth and delight” as many times as possible, Sternberg’s only shortcoming is that
he does not distinguish between Tolkien’s afterthoughts in the essay he
wrote about Smith and what was in his mind when he wrote the story
itself (a tendency he shares with other contributors to this collection). Finally, Frank Weinreich’s “Metaphysics of Myth: The Platonic Ontology
of ‘Mythopoeia’” gives us a line-by-line reading and interpretation of
the poem, comparing Tolkien’s undertaking to works by Keats, Lucretius,
Pope, and especially Plato. It’s good to see this major piece get some long
overdue attention, though those unfamiliar with terms like “ontology”
and “zoon logon echon” may find Weinreich’s explication heavy going at
times. His conclusion that Tolkien’s thought is “pure Platonism” (344)
makes him sound oddly like old Professor Diggory in Narnia, especially
when he dismisses the idea of competing influences from Tolkien’s Christianity or the writings of Owen Barfield (whom Weinreich, bizarrely, describes as a Gnostic) with the claim that both “developed Christian theology” and Gnosticism are themselves based on Plato.
Completists of course will no doubt want to acquire this collection,
along with the sixteen volumes in the Cormarë line that preceded it and
all those which will follow. While many of these essays do not tell you
much more than you could learn by reading and musing over Tolkien’s
work yourself, this should not discourage those interested in the full range308
Book Reviews
of Tolkien’s work from seeking out this collection. And the best of the
pieces here—Turner, Schneidewind, Alliot, Steimel, and Sternberg—
represent a real contribution to Tolkien studies.
JOHN D. RATELIFF
KENT, WASHINGTON
NOTES
1 Ironically, not all of their contributors seem to agree with them—cf.
Anna Slack’s comment in her essay about “the minor works on which
I have chosen to focus” (266); the term is also used by Ferré (61), Fornet-Ponse (153), Steimel (193), Benvenuto (251), and Hiley (291).
2 Many of these essays juxtapose two or more of these works; hence
the numbers given here add up to more than sixteen, the total number of essays in the collection.
3 I have since seen another copy with the correct back cover text, so
collectors should note that this book exists in at least two states.
4 Turner’s categories are (i) Mysterious (“The Sea-bell”), (ii) Philological—serious (“The Hoard”), (iii) Philological—playful (“Oliphaunt”
and “Fastitocalon”, the two Man-in-the-Moon poems, and “The
Stone Troll”), (iv) Metrical experiments (“Errantry”), (v) Parody and
Satire (“Perry-the-Winkle”), and (vi) Miscellaneous. This last category, which Turner describes as “doodles of Tolkien’s idle moments,”
seems to include the book’s seven remaining poems, but explicitly
includes “Princess Mee” and “Shadow Bride,” the latter of which
one might think would be more persuasively described as belonging
to his first category, Mysterious.
5 Spirito’s piece is enlivened with gnomic utterances—“it is the distance that makes the fire kind” (18), “Every form of life participates
in the light soul and also in the darkness of suffering” (19), “cows . . .
are not burdened by ultimate questions” (25)—as well as the occasional insight (“The legends of saints will endure since they serve this
deep need that we have: to believe that what we long for is possible” [32]).
6 At one point Ferré claims Augustus Bonifacius in Farmer Giles of Ham
is an Arthurian figure for two reasons: (1) he is the exact opposite of
some famous portrayals of Arthur and (2) he is just like other lesserknown portrayals of Arthur—which is trying to have it both ways at
once.
7 For example, who knew there were eighty-three distinct dragon saints
recognized by the Church? (81–82).309
Book Reviews
Truths Breathed Through Silver: The Inklings’ Moral and Mythopoeic Legacy, ed.
Jonathan B. Himes, with Joe R. Christopher and Salwa Khoddam. Newcastle, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2008. xviii, 160 pp. £29.99
/ $59.99 (hardcover). ISBN 9781847184443.
This collection was garnered from a decade of annual conferences
(I have never attended any of them—alas) beginning at Oklahoma City
University in 1998, which gave rise to and were subsequently sponsored
by the C. S. Lewis and Inklings Society (incorporated in 2004). The
choice of name makes plain on which particular Inkling the Society has
its focus, and indeed four of these ten essays are devoted to some aspect of Lewis’s work while another three consider Lewis prominently in
conjunction with other writers. Readers of Tolkien Studies may be most
interested that J.R.R. Tolkien is one of the other writers in two of these
cases, an ancillary figure in other essays (notably one discussing Lewis
and language), and the primary subject of two chapters. Charles Williams is the only other regular member of the Inklings considered here,
along with proto-Inklings (if one may so call them) George MacDonald
and G. K. Chesterton.
This is descriptive merely: those interested in other members of the
remarkable Inklings group (e.g, Owen Barfield or Nevill Coghill or Lord
David Cecil, et al.) are alerted to look elsewhere. It must have been difficult enough to distill papers from ten conferences into a volume of ten
essays without also trying to represent more than a few of the Oxford
Inklings.
Half of the papers are from keynote speakers at the C. S. Lewis and
Inklings Society conferences, and the volume opens with the keynote
from the first conference in 1998. Joe R. Christopher identifies “C. S.
Lewis’s Three Paths to God” as (in essence) via reason, ethics, and the
transcendent, with careful distinctions of what these meant to Lewis, and
that their conjunction led him to a theistic view of the universe but not
specifically to the Christian religion. Interestingly, he focuses on a work
that has not been overmuch discussed in Lewis criticism, although it was
this author’s first published book of Christian apologetics and of prose
fiction: The Pilgrim’s Regress: An Allegorical Apology for Christianity, Reason and
Romanticism (1933; the third edition of 1943 has some very needed explanatory notes). Professor Christopher mines this early Bunyanesque
book for concerns that Lewis developed throughout his career, so he also
touches on many later works, and shows that Lewis has remained a relevant thinker because his ideas have been found valuable by many people
throughout many social changes over many years. He also indicates why
Lewis does not persuade those who are committed to natural philosophy
only: they tend to be pragmatists. While, for example, they agree that310
Book Reviews
beings capable of reasoning with some clarity have in fact appeared in a
universe they consider non-rational, they no more worry that technically
this is logically inconsistent than they used to be concerned when for
years it was thought to be mathematically impossible for a bumblebee to
fly (the math has since been done to show that it is).
A small point is that he posits a new (and, to my mind, more plausible) theory as to why Lewis largely abandoned his closely reasoned but
popular apologetics after the 1940s. The prevailing idea has been that
Lewis was discouraged by having his logic challenged by G.E.M. Anscombe from within his own philosophical camp of Christian intellectuals, but this does not seem likely for such a skilled debater who was wont
to describe himself as “hungry for rational opposition,”1 and who was
able to reply to his challenger quite well on her own highly sophisticated
ground. Christopher suggests that he felt he had shot his bolt (or, rather,
his three bolts, having much explored the “three paths”) and was ready
to turn to other modes like the fairy tale in any case; a further point being
that Lewis wanted to address the general public and it is difficult to do
that while also speaking to every nuance to satisfy a specialist.2
This keynote address does indeed set the tone for most of the papers: thoughtful reflections by a (usually but not necessarily) Christian
scholar on universal moral concerns encapsulated in mythic literature.
The title of the collection indicates this, coming from Tolkien’s rejoinder
to the then-atheist Lewis’s objection that the world’s mythologies are lies
even though beautiful: Tolkien replied that myths show people trying to
apprehend truth through the imagination rather than ratiocination and
that both avenues should be used.
Of the two essays devoted to Tolkien, Jason Fisher’s is in this mode.
“Tolkien’s Fortunate Fall and The Third Theme of Ilúvatar” examines
the topos of the felix culpa (God bringing a greater good out of an evil
deed) from Melkor to Gollum, noting that the author’s mythology is not
completely consistent with his Catholic orthodoxy (he was not originally
trying to do that and his models, after all, were mostly pagan) but is imbued with his deep-rooted Christianity. Tolkien’s religious beliefs have
less overt relevance to “A Brief History of Libraries in Middle-earth” by
David Oberhelman other than that it is good to organize collections of
knowledge. Such repositories anywhere on Arda tend to suffer a fate as
dire as Tolkien’s real-world model of the great library of Alexandria, as
witness the destructions of Gondolin and Númenor. Oberhelman traces
the importance of what we would call libraries (he can find only one
instance where Tolkien uses this term) in the legendarium, culminating
in the books written by the Hobbits which become the fictional source of
our knowledge of this feigned history.
Theologian Kerry Dearborn’s “The Sacrament of the Stranger in311
Book Reviews
C. S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, and George MacDonald” examines how
the virtue of hospitality (which subsumes courtesy, mercy, empathy, trust)
supports moral and spiritual growth in characters such as Ransom, Frodo, Gimli, and Curdie. She draws particularly on the Celtic tradition of
Christianity (and on the experience of her own family as strangers in
Peru) but might have added that hospitality was a paramount virtue to
most ancient peoples, notably the writers of the Old Testament. The other chapter on Tolkien among a number of authors, Thomas Howard’s
“Lewis, Tolkien, and Williams as Spiritual Mentors,” is wisely left in its
original form as an after-dinner speech: revising it into a more formal
essay would weaken its charm and immediacy. Howard knows these authors well (and he adds in George MacDonald), recollecting characters
and scenes in a meandering fashion, each of them (for one example,
Sam’s awe in Lothlórien) having taught him something about being a
good person.
Tom Shippey contributes a thoughtful examination of Lewis as a
philologist, with particular attention to The Screwtape Letters and Studies in
Words, and his agreement with his contemporaries George Orwell and
Tolkien that corruptions in language (used not only for deception but for
self-deception) underlie much of what was evil in the twentieth century.
Normally good people can be induced to do very bad things if they are
befuddled into thinking it is for a good cause.
The other essays continue the main theme of morality and mythopoeia. Rolland Hein’s “Doors Out and Doors In: The Genius of Myth”
demonstrates the mythic apprehension of truth. Mathematician David
L. Neuhouser notes how his field of study figures as an intellectual and
spiritual discipline in the life and work of George MacDonald. Co-editor
Salwa Khoddam has a lengthy examination of the images of the ruined
city and the Edenic garden in The Magician’s Nephew while editor-in-chief
Jonathan Himes takes a careful look at deviant sexuality in the unfinished
Dark Tower (he playfully calls his chapter “The Allegory of Lust”).
The introduction by Professor Himes gives useful background on
the provenance of the essays and a good overview of each. The editors
should feel gratified that every chapter in this little book is well-written,
scholarly, and worthwhile for students of mythopoeic literature.
RICHARD C. WEST
UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN-MADISON
NOTES
1 C. S. Lewis and E.M.W. Tillyard, The Personal Heresy: A Controversy
(Oxford University Press, 1965 [first published in 1939]), chapter III,
49.312
Book Reviews
2 Lewis makes this point himself in his “Rejoinder” to another fellow
Christian, W. Norman Pittenger, Christian Century 75 (November 26,
1958): 1359-61.
Book Notes
In the fall of 2008, there appeared an expanded version of the omnibus of Tolkien’s shorter works, Tales from the Perilous Realm, which was
originally published in 1997. It now includes Roverandom, Farmer Giles of
Ham, The Adventures of Tom Bombadil, Smith of Wootton Major, “Leaf by Niggle,” and, as an appendix, “On Fairy-stories.” There are illustrations and
an “Afterword” by Alan Lee, and an “Introduction” by Tom Shippey.
The UK edition, published in hardcover by HarperCollins (Price £18.99
ISBN 9780007257546) is taller than the US edition from Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (Price $28.00 ISBN 9780547154114), and the colored illustration by Alan Lee on the endpapers appears only in the UK edition.
Tolkien’s Gedling 1914: The Birth of a Legend, by Andrew H. Morton and
John Hayes, is a slim trade paperback publication from Brewin Books.
It primarily concerns Tolkien’s Aunt Jane and her Phoenix Farm in
Gedling, near Nottingham, which Tolkien visited in September 1914,
when he wrote the poem about Earendel that was the germ of his invented mythology. Price £9.95 ISBN 9781858584232.
In early 2009, ADC Publications released Black & White Ogre Country:
The Lost Tales of Hilary Tolkien, edited by Angela Gardner and illustrated
by Jef Murray. This small hardcover reproduces the sketchy tales from a
notebook by Tolkien’s brother, Hilary Arthur Reuel Tolkien (1894-1976),
relating to their childhood. The short sketches are augmented by numerous illustrations, and the book closes with “A Brief Biography of Hilary
Tolkien,” which includes family photographs and letters. Price £9.95
ISBN 9780955190018.
The Ring Goes Ever On: Proceedings of the Tolkien 2005 Conference: 50 Years
of “The Lord of the Rings,” edited by Sarah Wells, appeared near the end
of 2008 in two very large trade paperback volumes, sold as a set and
published by The Tolkien Society. These volumes collect nearly one hundred papers presented at the conference held at Aston University, Birmingham, 11th-15th August 2005. A full review will appear in the next
volume of Tolkien Studies. Ordering information, including prices with
various shipping options, can be found at <www.tolkiensociety.org>.
Two collections of criticism related primarily to Peter Jackson’s films
of The Lord of the Rings are worth noting here. Martin Barker and Ernest312
Book Reviews
2 Lewis makes this point himself in his “Rejoinder” to another fellow
Christian, W. Norman Pittenger, Christian Century 75 (November 26,
1958): 1359-61.
Book Notes
In the fall of 2008, there appeared an expanded version of the omnibus of Tolkien’s shorter works, Tales from the Perilous Realm, which was
originally published in 1997. It now includes Roverandom, Farmer Giles of
Ham, The Adventures of Tom Bombadil, Smith of Wootton Major, “Leaf by Niggle,” and, as an appendix, “On Fairy-stories.” There are illustrations and
an “Afterword” by Alan Lee, and an “Introduction” by Tom Shippey.
The UK edition, published in hardcover by HarperCollins (Price £18.99
ISBN 9780007257546) is taller than the US edition from Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (Price $28.00 ISBN 9780547154114), and the colored illustration by Alan Lee on the endpapers appears only in the UK edition.
Tolkien’s Gedling 1914: The Birth of a Legend, by Andrew H. Morton and
John Hayes, is a slim trade paperback publication from Brewin Books.
It primarily concerns Tolkien’s Aunt Jane and her Phoenix Farm in
Gedling, near Nottingham, which Tolkien visited in September 1914,
when he wrote the poem about Earendel that was the germ of his invented mythology. Price £9.95 ISBN 9781858584232.
In early 2009, ADC Publications released Black & White Ogre Country:
The Lost Tales of Hilary Tolkien, edited by Angela Gardner and illustrated
by Jef Murray. This small hardcover reproduces the sketchy tales from a
notebook by Tolkien’s brother, Hilary Arthur Reuel Tolkien (1894-1976),
relating to their childhood. The short sketches are augmented by numerous illustrations, and the book closes with “A Brief Biography of Hilary
Tolkien,” which includes family photographs and letters. Price £9.95
ISBN 9780955190018.
The Ring Goes Ever On: Proceedings of the Tolkien 2005 Conference: 50 Years
of “The Lord of the Rings,” edited by Sarah Wells, appeared near the end
of 2008 in two very large trade paperback volumes, sold as a set and
published by The Tolkien Society. These volumes collect nearly one hundred papers presented at the conference held at Aston University, Birmingham, 11th-15th August 2005. A full review will appear in the next
volume of Tolkien Studies. Ordering information, including prices with
various shipping options, can be found at <www.tolkiensociety.org>.
Two collections of criticism related primarily to Peter Jackson’s films
of The Lord of the Rings are worth noting here. Martin Barker and Ernest313
Book Reviews
Mathijs co-edited Watching “The Lord of the Rings”: Tolkien’s World Audiences,
published in trade paperback in late 2007 by Peter Lang. Price $32.95
ISBN 9780820463964. Adam Lam and Nataliya Oryshchuk co-edited
How We Became Middle-earth: A Collection of Essays on “The Lord of the Rings,”
a trade paperback also issued in late 2007, from Walking Tree Publishers.
Price $28.00 ISBN 9783905703078.
DOUGLAS A. ANDERSON