vEditors’ IntroductionThis is the sixth issue of Tolkien Studies, the first refereed journal solelydevoted to the scholarly study of the works of J.R.R. Tolkien. As editors, our goal is to publish excellent scholarship on Tolkien as well asto gather useful research information, reviews, notes, documents, andbibliographical material.In this issue we are especially pleased to publish Tolkien’s note on“Fate and Free Will,” edited by Carl Hostetter.With this exception, and that of the lead article (which was solicitedfrom an expert in the field), all articles have been subject to anonymous,external review as well as receiving a positive judgment by the Editors.In the cases of articles by individuals associated with the journal in anyway, each article had to receive at least two positive evaluations fromtwo different outside reviewers. Reviewer comments were anonymouslyconveyed to the authors of the articles. XXXXXXXX Editors agreed to be boundby the recommendations of the outside referees.Douglas A. AndersonMichael D. C. DroutVerlyn FliegerviiAcknowledgmentsXXXXXXXX Editors would like to thank Wheaton College, Norton, MA, Provost Elita Pastra-Landis, and Wheaton Research Partners for their support. Wheaton’s Balfour Scholarship program and the Clemence Familysupported summer research that was essential to the production of theBibliography. XXXXXXXX efforts of editorial assistants Jason Rea, Lauren Provost, Tara McGoldrick and Kathryn Paar contributed immensely to thesuccess of the issue, as did Paula Smith-MacDonald, Vaughn Howlandand Raquel D’Oyen. It has continued to be a pleasure to work with WestVirginia University Press; thanks to Patrick Conner, Carrie Mullen, andespecially to Hilary Attfield for all her work in the production of the issue. For permission to publish Tolkien’s note on “Fate and Free Will” theeditors would like to thank Cathleen Blackburn, the Tolkien Estate, andChristopher Tolkien. Finally, we acknowledge a special debt of gratitudeto our anonymous, outside reviewers who with their collegial service contribute so much to Tolkien Studies.In MemoriamThis year Tolkien Studies remarks on the passing of two distinguishedmembers in our field, artist Pauline Baynes, and scholar and publisherDerek Brewer.Pauline Diana Baynes (1922-2008), the prolific artist and illustrator,was perhaps best known for her illustrations to the seven volumes of C.S. Lewis’s Chronicles of Narnia (1950-56). Baynes had previously illustratedTolkien’s Farmer Giles of Ham (1949), and over the years continued herassociation with Tolkien’s works, providing wrap-around cover art for the1961 Puffin edition of XXXXXXXX Hobbit and a triptych for the slip-case of the1964 deluxe edition of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, and illustrating XXXXXXXX Adventuresof Tom Bombadil (1962), Smith of Wootton Major (1967), A Map of Middle-earth(poster, 1970), XXXXXXXXre and Back Again (poster, based on XXXXXXXX Hobbit, 1971); Poems and Stories (1980), and Bilbo’s Last Song (poster 1974; book 1990). Herfinal Tolkien-related illustration appears, fittingly, to have been a returnto her earliest such work—her map of “XXXXXXXX Little Kingdom” was addedto the fiftieth anniversary edition of Farmer Giles of Ham (1999).Derek Brewer (1923-2008), Emeritus Professor of English at Cambridge, was a well-known medievalist and an early champion of Tolkien’swritings. Brewer’s essay on “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings as Romance” appearedin J.R.R. Tolkien, Scholar and Story-teller: Essays in Memoriam (1979), editedby Mary Salu and Robert T. Farrell.viiiConventions and AbbreviationsBecause there are so many editions of XXXXXXXX Hobbit and XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings, citations will be by book and chapter as well as by page-number(referenced to the editions listed below). Thus a citation from XXXXXXXX Fellowship of the Ring, book two, chapter four, page 318 is written (FR, II, iv, 318).References to the Appendices of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings are abbreviated byAppendix, Section and subsection. Thus subsection iii of section I ofAppendix A is written (RK, Appendix A, I, iii, 321). XXXXXXXX “Silmarillion”indicates the body of stories and poems developed over many years byTolkien; XXXXXXXX Silmarillion indicates the volume first published in 1977.AbbreviationsB&C Beowulf and the Critics. Ed. Michael D. C. Drout. Tempe,AZ: Arizona Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies,2002. Medieval and Renaissance Texts and Studies 248.Bombadil XXXXXXXX Adventures of Tom Bombadil, London: George Allen &Unwin, 1962; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1963.CH XXXXXXXX Children of Húrin [title as on title page:] Narn i Chîn Húrin:XXXXXXXX Tale of the Children of Húrin. Ed. Christopher Tolkien.London: HarperCollins, 2007; Boston: Houghton Mifflin,2007.FG Farmer Giles of Ham. Ed. Christina Scull and Wayne G.Hammond. London: HarperCollins, 1999. Boston:Houghton Mifflin, 1999.FR XXXXXXXX Fellowship of the Ring. London: George Allen & Unwin,1954; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1954. Second edition,revised impression, Boston: Houghton Mifflin,1987.H XXXXXXXX Hobbit. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1937. Boston:Houghton Mifflin, 1938. XXXXXXXX Annotated Hobbit. Ed. DouglasA. Anderson. Second edition, revised. Boston: HoughtonMifflin, 2002.Jewels XXXXXXXX War of the Jewels. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:HarperCollins; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1994.Lays XXXXXXXX Lays of Beleriand. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:George Allen & Unwin; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1985.ixLetters XXXXXXXX Letters of J.R.R. Tolkien. Ed. Humphrey Carpenter, withthe assistance of Christopher Tolkien. London: GeorgeAllen & Unwin; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1981.Lost Road XXXXXXXX Lost Road and Other Writings. Ed. Christopher Tolkien.London: Unwin Hyman; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987.Lost Tales I XXXXXXXX Book of Lost Tales, Part One. Ed. Christopher Tolkien.London: George Allen & Unwin, 1983; Boston: HoughtonMifflin, 1984.Lost Tales II XXXXXXXX Book of Lost Tales, Part Two. Ed. Christopher Tolkien.London: George Allen & Unwin; Boston: HoughtonMifflin, 1984.MC XXXXXXXX Monsters and the Critics and Other Essays. Ed. ChristopherTolkien. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1983; Boston:Houghton Mifflin, 1984.Morgoth Morgoth’s Ring. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:HarperCollins; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1993.OFS Tolkien On Fairy-stories: Extended Edition. Ed. Verlyn Fliegerand Douglas A. Anderson. London: HarperCollins, 2008.Peoples XXXXXXXX Peoples of Middle-earth. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:HarperCollins; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1996.RK XXXXXXXX Return of the King. London: George Allen & Unwin1955; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1956. Second edition,revised impression, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987.S XXXXXXXX Silmarillion. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London: GeorgeAllen & Unwin, 1977. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1977.Second edition. London:HarperCollins, 1999; Boston:Houghton Mifflin, 2001.Sauron Sauron Defeated. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:HarperCollins; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1992.Shadow XXXXXXXX Return of the Shadow. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:Unwin Hyman; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1988.Shaping XXXXXXXX Shaping of Middle-earth. Ed. Christopher Tolkien.London: George Allen & Unwin; Boston: HoughtonMifflin, 1986.xSWM Smith of Wootton Major: Extended Edition. Ed. Verlyn Flieger.London: HarperCollins, 2005.TL Tree and Leaf. London: Unwin Books, 1964; Boston:Houghton Mifflin, 1965. Expanded as Tree and Leaf,including the Poem Mythpoeia [and] XXXXXXXX Homecoming of BeorhtnothBeorhthelm’s Son. London: HarperCollins, 2001.TT XXXXXXXX Two Towers. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1954;Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1955. Second edition, revisedimpression, Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1987.Treason XXXXXXXX Treason of Isengard. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:Unwin Hyman; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1989.UT Unfinished Tales of Númenor and Middle-Earth. Ed. ChristopherTolkien. London: George Allen & Unwin; Boston:Houghton Mifflin, 1980.War XXXXXXXX War of the Ring. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:Unwin Hyman; Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1990.1Copyright © West Virginia University Press“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as LiteraryCraftsmanJOHN D. RATELIFFAt the beginning of J.R.R. Tolkien’s professional career, he made a revealing comment in a letter to Mary Wright, the wife of JosephWright (his old tutor and mentor as a philologist), expressing his feelingswhenever he browsed in her husband’s massive six-volume English DialectDictionary:Middle English is an exciting field—almost uncharted I begin to think, because as soon as one turns detailed personalattention on to any little corner of it the received notions andideas seem to crumple up and fall to pieces. (Letters 11)This I think very neatly describes the current state of Tolkien studies.XXXXXXXXre is a growing consensus on many points, but much of this broadagreement relies upon assumptions which in turn are based upon details that by and large have gone unexamined. And Tolkien was a details man, who distrusted any critical approach that dealt in generalities(like the so-called “monomyth” of Joseph Campbell, which would havebeen anathema to Tolkien).1 Tolkien found most of his own inspirationin close consideration of minute particulars. As in his professional work,so too in his storytelling: XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings is an easily summarizedstory, but any summary—“reluctant hero embarks on grueling quest to destroyevil artifact”—leaves out the details that bring the tale to life and give itits appeal—indeed, one might say, that make it worth reading. It is fromthe details that Tolkien crafted his world, and such details will well repayour attention, particularly the details whose significance emerges onlythrough close study of Tolkien’s texts and manuscripts, such as the Historyof Middle-earth series and the treasure-troves at Marquette University’sSpecial Collections and Archive and the Bodleian Library’s Departmentof Western Manuscripts. XXXXXXXXre has been a great deal of attention focused on why Tolkien created his legendarium; by focusing more on howwe can better understand how he made it so compelling.“Labour and Thought”XXXXXXXX first and most important point to make about Tolkien as a writeris to recognize the sheer amount of time, thought, and effort he was willing to put into his work. XXXXXXXX stories did not just emerge whole, channeledby an artiste in a rhapsody out of some kind of collective consciousness(or uncollected unconsciousness); they were made, by a master craftsman2John D. Rateliffwhose medium was words, ink, paper. We must, accordingly, take intoaccount a craftman’s practical considerations. When he was creating XXXXXXXXLord of the Rings, Tolkien was not just “expressing himself ”: he was writing for publication as well. As he put it in a letter to Stanley Unwin, thesuccess of XXXXXXXX Hobbit (which he had written to amuse himself and hisfamily and friends, and not submitted to a publisher until years after hehad finished it) allowed him to hope “whether duty and desire may not(perhaps) in future go more closely together.”2 Indeed, Tolkien wrote XXXXXXXXLord of the Rings at a publisher’s request, although the form it took wasentirely Tolkien’s own and differed considerably from what the publisherhad imagined. So although he wanted to try his hand at a really longstory (FR, Foreword to the Second Edition, 6) he did not want to produce an unpublishable book. If we want to draw an analogy from amonghis characters (a favorite preoccupation of Tolkien scholars, at least asfar back as Clyde Kilby’s Tolkien and XXXXXXXX Silmarillion), Tolkien is not theresponsibility-shirking solitary artist Niggle from “Leaf by Niggle,” concerned only with capturing a private vision. Instead, he is more like thecraftsman Smith from Smith of Wootton Major: someone who makes usefuland beautiful things, which he shares with his community; who has greatgifts which he uses to provide for his family.Tolkien himself emphasizes the amount of work involved in what hewas doing:Fantasy has . . . an essential drawback: it is difficult toachieve. . . . Anyone inheriting the fantastic device of humanlanguage can say the green sun. Many can then imagine orpicture it. But that is not enough. . . . To make a SecondaryWorld inside which the green sun will be credible . . . will .. . require labour and thought, and will certainly demanda special skill, a kind of elvish craft. Few attempt such difficult tasks. But when they are attempted and in any degreeaccomplished then we have a rare achievement . . . indeednarrative art, story-making in its primary and most potentmode. (MC 139-40)Of the three elements traditionally taken to make up a story—setting,characterization, and plot—Tolkien has been universally acknowledgedto excel in the first; that is, world-building: Middle-earth is made vividlyreal to the reader. For the second point, earlier critics sometimes underestimated his powers of characterization—Ursula K. LeGuin oncemade the astonishing confession that she could not tell Merry and Pippin apart3—but one of the good effects of the Jackson films has beenthat, by raising a debate on whether Jackson got certain characters right,they have focused attention on the unappreciated subtlety of Tolkien’s3“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsmanown characterization. Finally, on the third point, Tolkien has been muchpraised, by all but the most churlish, as a storyteller, for being adroit atpresenting a gripping plot. Indeed, Richard West long ago wrote a seminal essay on Tolkien’s gift with polyphonic narrative, his ability to moveback and forth between the various strands of the plot without ever losing track of the main thrust of the story. Diana Wynne Jones, herself asuccessful fantasy author, wrote from the point of view of a fellow authorwhen she praised Tolkien’s skill in managing a long, complex plot whilekeeping his readers enthralled and concluded, “there really was nothingabout narrative that Tolkien didn’t know.”4Where Tolkien has been mercilessly criticized has been on quite different grounds. First, for his subject matter (indeed, that anyone shouldwrite fantasy at all in this day and age). Second, for what is taken to behis affirmation of traditional values (which by the way is far more subtleand double-edged than either his admirers or his critics sometimes realize, a point nicely made in Marjorie Burns’s Perilous Realms). And third,for his style. Since the first topic, his subject matter, has been masterfullyaddressed by Tolkien himself in his essays “Beowulf: XXXXXXXX Monsters andXXXXXXXX Critics” and “On Fairy-stories,” and since the second, attacks onhis values system, tend to be politically motivated and self-defeating, reflecting worse on those who make them (e.g., China Miéville, GermaineGreer) than on their intended target, I would like to focus in on the thirdtopic: Tolkien’s style.Tolkien’s style is the tool with which he crafts his story. So it seemsdistinctly odd that, among all the attention that have been focused onthat story, there has been very little critique of his style, aside from Tolkien’s own spirited defense5 of his occasional use of archaisms in certaincontexts and Brian Rosebury’s careful demonstration of the obvious butoften-overlooked point that while Tolkien is frequently accused of writing “Biblical” prose, dense and inverted and artificial and archaic, in factthe vast majority of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings is written in ordinary everydayEnglish. It is no surprise that a disgruntled Edmund Wilson flatly asserted that both Tolkien’s prose and poetry are bad (328), but what are weto make of Stephen Medcalf ’s outrageous claim that Tolkien “really wasill-at-ease with his own language”?6 Or Burton Raffel, who although heuses words like “magnificent,” “entrancing,” “extraordinary,” “superb,”“wonderful,” and “a genuine epic” to describe XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings nonetheless asserts that it is not “literature” because it is too readable? Thatis, so far as I understand him, that its prose is meant to deliver the storyrather than be savored like a rare cheese or, in his words, “there is noreal attempt to explore sensory realities; only narrative realities matter toTolkien, and so adept is he that nothing more matters to us” (222). Raffelargues that Tolkien excels in delivering an engrossing story that sweeps4John D. Rateliffthe reader along, but asserts that “the language of literature must domore than this, must transmit information as well as sense impressions ofsome sort, and to effect this the language must be both more deeply feltand more deeply worked” (221).I will return to Raffel’s strictures in a minute, but first I want to drawattention to Tolkien’s own description of how his prose works, of whathe was trying to achieve. In one of the endnotes appended to “On Fairystories,” he includes the following revealing passage setting forth his narrative method, in which he makes clear his goal of writing in such a wayas to draw in his readers, making them participate in the creation ofthe fictional world by encouraging them to draw on their own personalmemories when reading one of his evocative passages:However good in themselves, illustrations do little good tofairy-stories. XXXXXXXX . . . distinction between all art . . . that offersa visible presentation and true literature is that [the former]imposes one visible form. Literature [by contrast] worksfrom mind to mind and is thus . . . at once more universaland more poignantly particular. If it speaks of bread or wineor stone or tree, it appeals to the whole of these things, to theirideas; yet each hearer will give to them a peculiar personalembodiment in his imagination. Should the story say “he atebread,” the dramatic producer or painter can only show “apiece of bread” . . . but the hearer of the story will think ofbread in general and picture it in some form of his own. Ifa story says “he climbed a hill and saw a river in the valleybelow,” the illustrator may catch, or nearly catch, his ownvision of such a scene; but every hearer of the words willhave his own picture, and it will be made out of all the hillsand rivers and dales he has ever seen, but specially out ofXXXXXXXX Hill, XXXXXXXX River, XXXXXXXX Valley which were for him the firstembodiment of the word. (MC 159)7Tolkien’s contrast here of a single image presented to the passive viewerwith the internal personalized visualization of a reader, who thus participates in the (sub)creation of the work, is of a piece with his championing,in the Foreword of the second edition to XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, of whathe calls applicability: his refusal to impose a single authorial or “allegorical” meaning on a work.8 I would argue that the style in which he choseto write, which he painstakingly developed over several decades until itreached its peak in XXXXXXXX Hobbit and Farmer Giles of Ham and XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings and some of the late Silmarillion material, is deliberately craftedto spark reader participation. That many readers do get drawn in is witnessed by the intense investment so many people have in these books, the5“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsmanstrong personal connection they form with the story, the almost visceralrejection of illustrations or dramatizations that do not fit their own inner vision of the characters, the returning to reread the books again andagain to renew our acquaintance with the imaginary world.Keeping that in mind, I would like to return to Raffel’s claim aboutthe need for literary fiction to “explore sensory realities.” Clearly, somewriters excel at just the sort of writing Raffel holds up as his paradigm.And, just as clearly, others excel in quite different ways. Contrast, forexample, the following two passages, the first by Tolkien, the second byfellow fantasy author John Bellairs:XXXXXXXX Company now gathered together as close to the cliffas they could. It faced southwards, and near the bottom itleaned out a little, so that they hoped it would give themsome protection from the northerly wind and from the falling stones. But eddying blasts swirled round them from everyside, and the snow flowed down in ever denser clouds.XXXXXXXXy huddled together with their backs to the wall. . . .A great sleepiness came over Frodo; he felt himself sinkingfast into a warm and hazy dream. He thought a fire washeating his toes, and out of the shadows on the other side ofthe hearth he heard Bilbo’s voice speaking. I don’t think muchof your diary, he said. Snowstorms on January the twelfth: there wasno need to come back to report that!But I wanted rest and sleep, Bilbo, Frodo answered with aneffort, when he felt himself shaken, and he came back painfully to wakefulness. Boromir had lifted him off the groundout of a nest of snow.“This will be the death of the halflings, Gandalf,” saidBoromir. . . . (FR, II, iii, 303)It did not look haunted, especially at noon, this crowded,textured, interwoven wood. Prospero saw every shade ofgreen, from light, bleached, papery, yellow-green to a dark,wet, inky green that was almost black. Willows, poplars, maples, oaks, and stubby kinked mulberry trees. . . .Once he was actually inside the forest . . . Prospero knewwhat was wrong. XXXXXXXXre are times when you feel that you heardoors slamming in the distance, voices calling your name;you see blurred things, far away or very close up, that looklike people until you focus on them. That was the trouble.XXXXXXXX whole place seemed slightly out of focus, very slightlyoff. It was as if you were half asleep. . . . [H]e had to stare at6John D. Rateliffa tree for several seconds before it looked like a tree and not aleaning furry shadow. He felt very nervous, drowsily nervous,with prickling dark borders on his sight. A . . . bell was ringing somewhere deep, deep in the forest. An icy green glassbell ridged with frost, trembling on a green willow branch.(Bellairs 74, 76)Of these, note that in the passage from Tolkien, he does not describeevery detail—what color were the rocks? who was on either side of Frodoas he sat huddled against the bitter cold? But Tolkien does tell us everything we need to know, in general terms with just enough specific detailto bring the scene home, to guide the reader’s imagination, to draw onour own memories of being cold and frozen, exhausted and miserable.We do not need to know what Frodo looked like, because we are lookingthrough his eyes; too much detail would actually limit the applicability.XXXXXXXX excerpt from Bellairs, by contrast, almost baroque in its elaboration when contrasted to Tolkien’s plainstyle, tells us everything we needto know and more; it paints a vivid word-picture to help us preciselyvisualize the scene. Bellairs masterfully creates what it is like to be doingsomething that frightens you but which you have decided you must seethrough, the first stages of what will within a few pages become purepanic-stricken terror. But it’s a scene viewed from outside; we identifywith the character’s experience, but we do not contribute to it.Raffel might say that the transparency of Tolkien’s prose carries thereader along on the surface of a fast-flowing river, while Bellairs’ opaqueness causes him or her to sink into and savor the moment, surroundedby the specificity of the experience. But I would reverse the metaphorand instead suggest that Tolkien deliberately withholds the kind of detailBellairs provides so that the reader is nudged into providing it himself orherself, since this participation draws the reader into the work.In addition, I think another element is at work here, one not plannedby Tolkien but nonetheless present throughout XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings: heoften describes a scene not as you would experience it but as you wouldremember it afterwards. That is, his prose assumes the tone of thingswhich have already happened, as they are stored in our memory. Thusthe “walking bits,” which have so annoyed impatient readers who areonly reading for the plot, do not in fact detail every day of Frodo’s yearlong journey but instead are rendered down to a relatively few vivid images, such as would linger in the memory long after the event. After youhave read these passages and think back on them, they very stronglyresemble your actual memories of similar events (in fact, the very onesthat provided the mental images that flashed through your mind whenreading them) : a general recollection of where you were and what you7“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsmanwere doing anchored by a few sharp, vivid, specific details that stand out.Thus the memory of reading the story gains the associations of events inthe reader’s own life, because the one has already drawn upon the other.“A Rare Achievement”In order to support my claim that Tolkien was a master craftsmanin his chosen medium, words, I would like to look at three specific caseswhere close examination of detail highlights the “labour and thought”that underlie his “rare achievement” and, I think, casts some light on hisworking method. It is sometimes said that “the devil is in the details,” butin fact this is a modern reversal of the original proverb, which was “Godis in the details.” In any case, it is in such detailed examinations that thehand of the craftsman who made the piece shows up; looking at almostany point in Tolkien’s complex prose reveals the careful construction,and dense web of words and allusions and images and associations, thatunderlie his tale.For my first example, I would like to look at the description of themoon rising over Lake Town during the battle with Smaug. As the scenewas originally drafted, the moon does not appear, but Tolkien quicklyadded several significant references: first the thrush’s warning“Wait, wait” it said “the moon is rising. Look for the hollowof the left breast as he flies and turns above you.” XXXXXXXXn Barddrew his last arrow from his quiver. XXXXXXXX dragon was circlingback, and the moon rose above the eastern shore and silvered hisgreat wings. (Rateliff, Return to Bag-End 549; my emphasis)Also added at this time is the detail of Smaug’s fatal weak spot showingup in the moonlight:As he turned and dived down his belly glittered white withsparkling fire in the moon—but not in one spot. (550)Finally, the beautiful little passage describing the aftermath of the dragon’s death and spectacular fall into the dark waters opens by focusing ourattention on the moon:XXXXXXXX moon rose higher and higher, and the North wind grew loudand cold. It twisted the white fog upon the lake into bendingpillars and hurrying clouds, and drove it off to the West toscatter in tattered wisps over the marshes before Mirkwood.XXXXXXXXn the many boats could be seen dotted on the surface ofthe lake, and down the wind came the sound of the voices ofthe people of Esgaroth lamenting their lost town and goodsand ruined homes. (554; my emphasis)8John D. RateliffNow, I think it is clear that Tolkien here has a very strong visual image of the scene which he is concerned to convey to us as clearly andvividly as possible.9 This is a clear departure from his usual style, wherehe sets up a framework then leaves most details to the reader’s imagining.But a true craftsman has more than one tool, more than one technique,to achieve his ends. A departure from the norm, offering up a sharpcontrast to what came before and what follows, can be very effective.This particular technique was a favorite of his friend C. S. Lewis, whofrequently began his own stories with a mental picture which he thenbuilt a story around.10 Major Warnie Lewis, CSL’s older brother, goesfurther and recounts in his diary that during one evening’s Inklings meeting (which Tolkien attended) the Major:made the always cheering discovery that what I had assumed to be an individual mental anfractuosity,11 is sharedby J[ack], i.e. that we can both only imagine what comes intoour heads, but cannot direct our imaginations. For instance,said I, when I picture the country house I would have if Iwere a rich man, I can say that my study window opens on alevel park full of old timber: but I see undulating ground witha fir topped knoll. I can of course fix my mind on the levelpark, but when I turn to the window again after arrangingmy books, there is the knoll once more. J says it is the samewith him when he is writing a novel: he must use the knoll andcan’t force himself to use the level park. (193)Tolkien’s own literary inspirations tended by his own testimony tocome more from euphonious names (like “Earendel”) and invented words(like “hobbit”), but a process similar to the one Lewis describes is clearlyat work in scenes like this one—sharp, detailed moments that contrastwith Tolkien’s usual practice but serve to punctuate the story. And sometimes that mental image contained elements that introduced contradictions into the story. What Tolkien is describing here—a dark night slowlylit by the moon rising in the east—is something that could only take placeat the time of a full moon or, more probably, one a little past full (since atrue full moon rises at the same time as the sun sets, which does not seemto be the case here; at least some period of full darkness intervenes). Thisis confirmed by two illustrations Tolkien did for the book, both of which,at least as originally drawn, show a full moon in the eastern sky on thenight of the dragon’s marauding (Return to Bag-End, Plate X, bottom; andPlate XII, top). But we know from reading the story that Smaug’s attackcame only a little over twenty-four hours after the opening of the SecretDoor, on the night of the day following Durin’s Day, and that Durin’sDay (“as all should know”) only occurs at the time of the New Moon,9“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsmanwhen the moon appears as the thinnest crescent low in the Western sky.We thus have a paradox: we know that the moon must be in a specificphase (a thin crescent in the west, already in the sky when the sun sets,and setting itself a short time later), but the description of it rising in theeastern sky well after dark shows it is somehow at the other end of its cycle,as if two weeks had passed in two nights. Now, we could just accept thefantasy explanation—after all, this is a world where stars fall from thesky at the sound of the dragon’s death cry (Return to Bag-End 549, 554)and the moon is actually a giant flower taken from the White Tree ofValinor and set to sail through the sky under the guidance of Tilion theMaia, whom we are told several times is wayward in his journeys acrossthe night sky (“XXXXXXXX Sketch of the Mythology,” Shaping 20; “XXXXXXXX Quenta”of 1930, Shaping 97). But Tolkien was too good an amateur astronomer,or became too good an astronomer during the writing of XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings, to let that pass, and at some point he noticed the discrepancy andtried to fix it.Thus the sketch “Death of Smaug” (circa 1937) has a crescent superimposed over the original full moon and the annotation in the margin“XXXXXXXX moon should be a crescent: it was only a few nights after the NewMoon on ‘Durin’s Day’” (Return to Bag-End 561). In the 1966 Third Edition Hobbit, he altered the passage so that instead of “XXXXXXXX moon rosehigher” it now reads “XXXXXXXX waxing moon rose higher” (Anderson, XXXXXXXXAnnotated Hobbit 308, 312). Unfortunately, this does not resolve the problem, since while these two suggested fixes put the moon in its right phase(more or less) they leave it in the wrong part of the sky. So, we see thatTolkien employed a variety of techniques, of which we have looked atonly two, but that mixing them sometimes created problems of its own.This was a price he was willing to accept, like a carpenter using the knotsin fine-grained wood for their appealing contrast, despite their lack ofsymmetry with the whole.For my second example, I would like to focus in on a discovery madeby my friend the late Taum Santoski that remained unpublished untilthe recent release of Mr. Baggins, in which we see Tolkien crafting a placename. This is a good example of the kind of information that can onlybe learned from close study of the manuscripts at Marquette; you couldnever discover it from looking at the final published book, no matter howdeeply you delved. Tolkien’s gift for nomenclature has been widely acknowledged, but not the work he put into it; most who have drawn anyattention to it simply take it for granted as a knack Tolkien was luckyenough to have, not as the result of deliberate craft.12XXXXXXXX manuscript shows that Tolkien originally intended for Bilbo torendezvous with the dwarves not at the Green Dragon Inn, as in the published book, but at the Great Mill. At a very late stage (February 1937),10John D. Rateliffwhen he was correcting the first set of page proofs from the publisherafter the book had been set up in type, he struck out the Great Mill acrossthe Water and instead penciled in the margin the Green Man inn by the Water,at the same time making corresponding pencil changes to the next page,so that [1] down the lane, and over the bridge, across XXXXXXXX Water becomes downthe lane, past the great Mill, across XXXXXXXX Water; [2] when he got to the Great Millbecomes when he got to Bywater; and [3] instead of standing at the mill-doorBalin is on lookout standing at the inn door (Marquette 1/2/1: 41). But before returning the corrected proofs to Unwin Brothers (Allen & Unwin’sprinters) he revisited the passage and changed it again, in ink, to the GreenDragon Inn, Bywater. Aside from marking the emergence of the name Bywater, these changes are interesting because each name in Tolkien’s sequence of choices has distinctive resonances in his life and work.• XXXXXXXX first, the Great Mill, is directly based upon an actual mill Tolkien lived next to when he was growing up (between the ages offour to eight), Sarehole Mill on the River Cole in what is now theHall Green area on the south side of Birmingham. Unlike the innthat replaced it in the story, which Tolkien never drew, the Mill isfeatured clearly in all Tolkien’s illustrations of Hobbiton, centeredin the foreground (e.g., Mr. Baggins Plate IV top, and Hammondand Scull, Artist and Illustrator 100–107). And, renamed Sandyman’sMill, it features in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings a generation or two later,where its transformation into a pollution-belching factory is one ofthe iconic examples of Sharkey’s corruption of the Shire.13• Tolkien’s second choice, the Green Man inn, draws on traditionalEnglish folklore about the Green Man—who seems to be a modern conflation of two figures, or perhaps two separate expressions of the same figure: the first a leafy face often found carvedin English churches about which little is known and the seconda wild man appearing in masques and village pageants and alsofrequently represented on Inn signs. Tolkien later developed thesein two separate ways in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings: the former as theents, or tree-folk, and the latter as the woodwoses or “wild men ofthe woods.” It is worth noting that many believe that some formof the Green Man lies behind the antagonist in Sir Gawain and theGreen Knight, one of the three works Tolkien was most associatedwith as a medieval scholar (the other two being Beowulf and the Ancrene Wisse).14In any case XXXXXXXX Green Man was already a traditionalname for an English Inn long before Tolkien’s time, and remainspopular today—for example, there was a Green Man in Leeds(since demolished) during Tolkien’s time there. Another GreenMan Inn in Derbyshire, which still exists today, is mentioned in11“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary CraftsmanBoswell’s Life of Johnson (Boswell 751), and even the most cursoryresearch turns up other inns of that name (past and present) inHerefordshire, Sussex, Northamptonshire, Lancashire, Staffordshire, Norfolk, Essex, Yorkshire, Lincolnshire, and Kent. Tolkien’sreasons for abandoning the name are unknown, but it was certainly not because it included the word “Man” in the name for whatwas (presumably) an Inn in hobbit-lands, since that word occurredseveral times in the original edition of XXXXXXXX Hobbit to refer to Bilboor the dwarves, not being removed until its appropriateness waschallenged by fellow author Arthur Ransome, several months afterthe book’s publication (Return to Bag-End, Appendix IV).• XXXXXXXX third choice, the Green Dragon Inn, which made it into the published book, is no less intriguing. XXXXXXXX first story Tolkien ever wrote,at about the age of six or seven (that is, when he was still livingnear Sarehole Mill), was a tale about “a green great dragon.”Upon being told by his mother that this should be “great green”instead, Tolkien got so fascinated by this unexpected glimpse ofthe deep structure of his own language, with its unarticulated rulesthat everyone learns idiomatically without knowing the why behind them, that he abandoned storytelling for more than a decadeand shifted his focus to language itself instead; it may mark themoment that sparked the awakening of the philologist within. Inany case, it’s striking to note that Tolkien did indeed eventuallywrite a story about a green dragon, “XXXXXXXX Dragon’s Visit,” oneof the “songs of Bimble Bay” series dating from the late 1920s(probably circa 1928)15—that is, just before he began work on XXXXXXXXHobbit. And of course like XXXXXXXX Green Man, XXXXXXXX Green Dragonis a traditional Inn or tavern name in England; there is a famouscenturies-old pub on the outskirts of Cambridge by that name, aswell as inns and taverns in Gloucestershire, Wensleydale, southeast Wales, Norfolk, and Worcestershire; no less than three inns inLondon bore that name at one time or another. And, crossing theocean, Boston’s Green Dragon Tavern, which dates back aboutthree and a half centuries, is famous as one of the gathering spotsof Paul Revere and his fellow Sons of Liberty during the eventsleading up to the Revolutionary War.Both XXXXXXXX Green Man and the Green Dragon Inn do have a comic effect the Great Mill would have lacked; through juxtaposition they bringin a reference to something from the Wild World outside into the heartof the comfortable settled hobbit country (as the younger Miller says inXXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, “XXXXXXXXre’s only one Dragon in Bywater, and that’sGreen”—(FR, I, ii, 53). Tolkien may ultimately have decided that the12John D. Rateliffcontrast was sharper with a dragon than a wild man and so the quiet jokewould accordingly be more noticable.Finally, for my third example, I would like to offer a cautionary taleand look at a case which highlights the perils of over-thinking the mighthave-beens and putting too much emphasis on the story’s drafts at the expense of the book(s) that Tolkien actually produced. Close textual studiescan lead to interesting discoveries, such as the effervescent appearanceof XXXXXXXX Green Man this once and only once within Tolkien’s opus, butthe dark side of such work is that it can also be the cause of introducingerrors into the book where there were none before.For example, in Chapter V of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, “A ConspiracyUnmasked”, Frodo asks Merry “How soon could we get off ?” as he decides whether or not to leave Crickhollow at once for fear of Black Ridersor remain behind hoping Gandalf will show up. Merry replies“. . . we could get off in an hour. I have prepared practically everything. XXXXXXXXre are six ponies in a stable across thefields; stores and tackle are all packed, except for a few extraclothes, and the perishable food.” (FR, I, v, 117)Now, this is how the text read from its first publication in 1954 until threeyears ago, when it was changed in the Hammond-Scull Fiftieth Anniversary Edition so that Merry now says “XXXXXXXXre are five ponies in [the] stable.” XXXXXXXX reasons for this change go back to Christopher Tolkien’s 1986edition of the manuscripts for this passage in XXXXXXXX Return of the Shadow(326–327), where he notes that originally all five hobbits present duringthis discussion were to enter the Old Forest, and concluded that whenone hobbit was designated to remain behind “this detail was overlooked,and the six ponies remained at this point” in the text, with the implication that it should have been changed to five ponies instead. This suggestion was taken up by David Bratman in his article “A Corrigenda to XXXXXXXXLord of the Rings,” which appeared in Christina Scull’s XXXXXXXX Tolkien Collector(March 1994) and attempts to list all known changes that would need tobe made to achieve our best possible approximation to textual perfection. Bratman concedes that some of the “errors” he points out “wouldrequire the author’s intervention” to set right but asserts that ‘some ofthese discrepancies, such as the extra pony at [Volume] I [page] 117 . . .may be corrected with some confidence and precision.” (“Corrigenda”18–19). Accordingly, the text is indeed changed in the 2004 HammondScull edition (Fiftieth Anniversary Lord of the Rings 107), which is intendedto become the new standard text of the book henceforth.This reasoning seem solid at first glance, and the credentials of thosewho have put this theory forward are impeccable, but as soon as you backup and look at it from the point of view of the published book rather13“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsmanthan the manuscript drafts the argument falls apart. Here is the sequenceof events in the published work (FR, I, vi, 120): When Frodo does decideto go by way of the Old Forest, Merry brings the baggage-pony to thehouse to load up, then leads it and his fellow hobbits to the stables, whereall five (Frodo, Sam, Merry, Pippin, and Fatty Bolger) mount up and ridefor an hour to the gate in the Hedge separating Buckland from the OldForest. Here Fatty says goodbye to them and returns the way he came,while the rest ride onward with their five ponies (who are later given thenames Sharp-ears, Wise-nose, Swish-tail, Bumpkin, and White-socks byTom Bombadil; FR, I, viii, 155). Five ponies entering the Forest, plus onepony ridden back to Crickhollow by Fatty Bolger, equals six: Tolkien’soriginal count was precisely right, and the new revised text introduces anerror by changing it to five.16 XXXXXXXX vision of Fatty Bolger jogging alongsidehis mounted companions for a solid hour while they rode in comfort isenough, I think, to refute any argument that he did not have a pony ofhis own when he accompanied them to the border of Buckland—especially since Tolkien himself had Tom Bombadil address this very issuethree chapters later, when he provides his own pony (Fatty Lumpkin) inorder to accompany them on their way:“. . . old Tom’s going to ride . . . he’s coming with you, just toset you on the road; so he needs a pony. For you cannot easily talk tohobbits that are riding, when you’re on your own legs trying to trot besidethem.” (FR, I, viii, 156; my emphasis).And if this is true of the larger, lively, hopping-with-energy Bombadil,how much more must it be true for the lethargic Fatty Bolger? It is muchmore likely that Tolkien got the math right and that Merry was quitecorrect in saying that there were six ponies in the stable: the four riddenby the hobbits who enter the Old Forest, the pack-pony taken with theminto the Forest, and the sixth pony ridden from Crickhollow to the HighHay and then back again by Fatty Bolger.17Small details? Of course! But then, as we have already seen, Tolkienis a writer with whom details matter; they are the individual stones, notwo alike, from which he builds his lighthouses on the Shores of Faerie.Changing a word here, a phrase there, a reference over yonder, can havea cascading effect. And while Tolkien’s creation is robust enough to survive such minor changes, I would suggest that it is not the editor’s roleto change a work entrusted to his or her care. Rather, as I see it, it is theeditor’s task to preserve and present the author’s intent as clearly andaccurately as possible.It is far easier, and more accurate, to avoid all these difficulties by letting Tolkien’s original text stand. Tolkien was unusually fortunate as anauthor in that, as the Lord of the Rings galleys at Marquette prove, he had14John D. Rateliffalmost18 total control over his text, even to the degree that he was ableto insist on favorite spellings of words—something almost unheard ofin publishing, where such matters are determined by house style and inhouse editors think nothing of copyediting a text. Certainly some of hiscontemporaries left behind texts riddled with unintended errors—JamesJoyce comes to mind19—but this is not, or at least was not, the case withTolkien. But that immunity from editorial interference within his ownlifetime has, in recent years, given way to a chimerical quest for a perfecttext, with I think regrettable consequences. Even if we were to assumethe number of ponies is in error, despite evidence to the contrary, weknow from the example of the moon over Lake Town that Tolkien wasaware of “errors” which he chose to preserve in the text. How are we,not being Tolkien, to know which apparent “errors” he was aware of andintended to stand? By all means we should correct typos, especially thosewhich crept in with later printings, but we should always remain wary ofsubstituting our words for Tolkien’s, and avoid changing the original textto suit our own ideas about what Tolkien should have said, in the interestsof preserving what he actually did say.Conclusion: Tolkien the WordsmithIn the end, what we carry away from a reading of Tolkien’s books isour delight in the world Tolkien created, and the characters he populatedit with, and the stories he tells of what happens to them. Seventy yearsafter XXXXXXXX Hobbit was published, and more than fifty years since XXXXXXXX Lord ofthe Rings joined it, and thirty since XXXXXXXX Silmarillion completed the triptychsetting forth his fantasy mythology, the appeal of his work is as great asever. It has found an ever-widening audience around the world, eager toshare in the insights of other readers who have thought deeply about hisstories and brought different things with them to their readings, differentparticipations to his sub-creation. With the great medieval authors Tolkien so loved, like the authors of Beowulf and Sir Gawain and the Green Knight,we are left with only the final product and can only make ill-informedguesses about how these works were created. We are fortunate beyondwords that a pre-eminent author like Tolkien preserved his manuscripts,through which we can trace every step of the creative process from firstscribbled lines through the multiple drafts to the final polishing manythousands of pages later.NOTESThis paper was originally delivered as the 2007 Blackwelder Lectureat Marquette University on October 4th, 2007.1 Cf. Tolkien’s rejection, in “On Fairy-stories,” of those who treat myth15“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsmanor folklore in generalized or synoptic form, rather than focusing onthe significance of specific stories.[S]tudents of folk-lore . . . are inclined to say that any twostories that are built round the same folk-lore motive . . . are“the same stories.” . . . Statements of that kind may express(in undue abbreviation) some element of truth; but they arenot true . . . in art or literature. It is precisely the colouring,the atmosphere, the unclassifiable individual details of a story. . . that really count. (MC 119)Among those whose methodology Tolkien rejects here would be Fraser, Frye, Jung, and Campbell.2 XXXXXXXX full passage from Tolkien’s letter to his publisher, with whom hewas already discussing which of several projects would be the bestfollow-up to XXXXXXXX Hobbit, reads “I must confess that your letter hasaroused in me a faint hope. I mean, I begin to wonder whether dutyand desire may not (perhaps) in future go more closely together. Ihave spent nearly all the vacation-times of seventeen years examining, and doing things of that sort, driven by immediate financialnecessity (mainly medical and educational). Writing stories in proseor verse has been stolen, often guiltily, from time already mortgaged,and has been broken and ineffective. I may perhaps now do whatI much desire to do, and not fail of financial duty. Perhaps!”(Letters24).3 Le Guin’s comment comes in her essay “XXXXXXXX Staring Eye,” written asa tribute at the time of Tolkien’s death, where she mentions readingthe book aloud to each of her children in turn, and observes that “thenine-year-old likes Merry, but doesn’t much like Pippin. I never couldtell them apart to that extent” (172). By contrast, Marion ZimmerBradley, of all people, was more perceptive, giving a detailed contrastbetween the two hobbits’ behavior and attitude in “Men, Halflings,and Hero Worship” (Isaacs and Zimbardo 112).4 West’s essay, “XXXXXXXX Interlace Structure of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,” appears in A Tolkien Compass, ed. Jared Lobdell (1975). Jones’s “XXXXXXXXShape of the Narrative in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,” a good essay in abad collection, appeared in J.R.R. Tolkien: This Far Land (1983), ed.Robert Giddings. More recently, Le Guin has drawn attention to therhythms of Tolkien’s plotting, alternating dangers with periods ofrest, in “Rhythmic Pattern in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,” her contributionto Meditations on Middle-earth (2001), ed. Karen Haber.16John D. Rateliff5 Tolkien’s discussion of his selective use of archaic language to expressnonmodern points of view, particularly in the Rohan sections of XXXXXXXXLord of the Rings, comes in his draft letter of September 1955 to HughBrogan, who had earlier criticized such usage (Letters 225–226).6 Medcalf originally made this claim in his Hobbit Workshop presentation at Church House, London, on Saturday May 16th 1987; I quotehim here from my notes taken on that occasion. His presentation hassince been published in rewritten form as the essay “XXXXXXXX LanguageLearned of Elves” in the 1999 volume of VII, without the offendingphrase but still stressing “his alienation from modern English” (Medcalf 34).7 That Raffel utterly failed to understand what Tolkien is saying hereis shown by his quoting this very passage and retorting that “ ‘Heclimbed a hill and saw a river in the valley below’ does not . . . evokeany kind of scene at all. It is a cog in some narrative machine: therewas some reason for this person to climb a hill, there was some reasonfor him to see a river, and some consequence perhaps flowed therefrom . . . None of this has anything to do with what words as wordscan communicate; the question of style is simply not at issue” (Raffel226–227).8 Specifically, Tolkien wrote “many confuse ‘applicability’ with ‘allegory’; but the one resides in the freedom of the reader, and the otherin the purposed domination of the author” (FR, Foreword to the Second Edition, 7). Note that for Tolkien the word “allegory” had a veryspecific meaning somewhat at odds with the looser usage of some ofthose who have written about him; for him, an “allegory” must contain one-on-one correspondences between the fictional charactersand events and the things they represent, like a roman-a-clef. Thusneither “Leaf by Niggle” nor Smith of Wootton Major is an allegory asTolkien would have defined the term.9 For another example, see a short piece written by Tolkien in 1966that I call “Notes on a Parley,” which will appear in a future editionof Return to Bag-End. In it, he devotes several pages to describing thearrangement of the new wall or barricade Thorin and Companythrew across the Front Gate during the Siege of the Mountain, thepath from there to Ravenhill, and the collapsed bridge over the rivernear Dale.10 Lewis’s method is most straightforwardly described in his essay “It AllBegan With A Picture . . .” (1960), collected in On Stories (53–54).17“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary Craftsman11 I.e., a twist or quirk.12 In his 1965 BBC radio interview with Denys Gueroult, Tolkien reactswith pleasure when Gueroult praises his ability to enhance characterization through nomenclature. Although Tolkien describes it as “aminor technical craft,” he goes on to affirm that he took a great dealof time and effort over this aspect of his work to achieve his desiredeffects.13 XXXXXXXXre is a historical irony in this, since it turns out that the originalSarehole Mill had been converted to industrial uses in the mid-18thcentury but had reverted to grinding grain in Tolkien’s time; see JohnEzard, “Tolkien’s Shire” (1991). Preserved through the foresight ofsolicitor Arthur Foster (d. 1928), who willed the site to the city onprovision that Mill, meadow, pond, and cottages (including the onethe Tolkiens had lived in) all be preserved, it is now a museum amida wilderness preserve (Mosley Bog).14 Cf. for example Verlyn Flieger’s “XXXXXXXX Green Man, XXXXXXXX GreenKnight, and Treebeard: Scholarship and Invention in Tolkien’s Fiction” (85–98).15 I am indebted to Douglas Anderson for establishing, and sharingwith me, the probable date of this sequence (Mr. Baggins 187 Note 12;and 377 Note 1).16 Specifically, Tolkien writes that “the five hobbits” entered the stable andthen says that “XXXXXXXXy mounted, and soon they were riding off. . . .After riding for about an hour . . . they saw the Hedge looming suddenly ahead” (FR, I, vi, 120; emphasis mine). XXXXXXXXre is no indicationof any sort that by “they” Tolkien means only four of the five hobbitspresent. XXXXXXXX natural reading of this passage would be that all fiverode, accompanied by the sixth baggage pony.17 Hammond and Scull approach the problem from a slightly differentangle in their XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings Companion, claiming that:Although some readers have tried to explain the reading “sixponies” by suggesting that one was for Fredegar to ride withhis friends as far as the hedge, Merry is here answering Frodo’squestion about preparations, with details of transport and provisions specifically for the four hobbits who are to make the journey—excluding Fredegar. (118)In essence, Hammond and Scull here are arguing that while there actually are six ponies present in the stables, Merry should only mention18John D. Ratelifffive of them since the sixth is not part of his “preparations.” Evenif we grant their argument, this means Merry’s unaltered statementwas in fact accurate—there were six ponies in the stable that night—while their altered reading must be parsed as meaning somethinglike “there are five ponies in the stable, plus a sixth one that does notcount and must not be mentioned because it is only going part-waywith us.”18 “Almost”: the one important change imposed upon Tolkien by hispublisher was the work’s division into three volumes rather than thelarge single volume Tolkien would have preferred, a change dictatedby the publisher’s desire to spread their projected financial loss overthree fiscal years. Of course, the book proved to be successful fromthe very start, so much so that Allen & Unwin accelerated the releaseschedule of the second and third volumes.19 Not only was Joyce more or less legally blind during the period whenhe was trying to proofread Finnegans Wake, but most of his later bookswere typeset by men who could not read the language in which theywere written.WORKS CITEDAnderson, Douglas A. XXXXXXXX Annotated Hobbit: Revised and Expanded edition.Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2002.———, and Marjorie Burns, ed. On Tolkien: Interviews, Reminiscences, andOther Essays. forthcoming.Bellairs, John. XXXXXXXX Face in the Frost. New York: XXXXXXXX Macmillan Company,1969.Boswell, James. XXXXXXXX Life of Samuel Johnson L.L.D. New York: Modern Library, [n.d.]. [Originally published in 1791.]Bradley, Marion Zimmer. “Men, Halflings, and Hero Worship.” In Tolkien and the Critics: Essays on J.R.R. Tolkien’s XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings.ed. Neil D. Isaacs and Rose A. Zimbardo. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1968. [Originally published in Niekas1966];Bratman, David. “A Corrigenda to XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings.” XXXXXXXX Tolkien Collector no. 6 (March 1994): 17–27.Burns, Marjorie. Perilous Realms: Celtic and Norse in Tolkien’s Middle-earth.Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2005.19“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary CraftsmanCarpenter, Humphrey. Tolkien: A Biography. Boston: Houghton MifflinCompany, 1977.Chance, Jane, ed. Tolkien and the Invention of Myth: A Reader. Lexington:XXXXXXXX University of Kentucky Press, 2004.———, and Alfred K. Siewers, eds. Tolkien’s Modern Middle Ages. NewYork: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.———, ed. Tolkien the Medievalist. London and New York: Routledge,2003.Ezard, John. “Tolkien’s Shire,” XXXXXXXX Guardian, 28 December 1991.Flieger, Verlyn. “XXXXXXXX Green Man, XXXXXXXX Green Knight, and Treebeard:Scholarship and Invention in Tolkien’s Fiction.” In Scholarship& Fantasy: Proceedings of XXXXXXXX Tolkien Phenomenon, May 1992Turku, Finland, ed. K. J. Batterbee. Turku, Finland: Universityof Turku, 1993.———. Interrupted Music: XXXXXXXX Making of Tolkien’s Mythology. Kent: KentState University Press, 2005.Garth, John. Tolkien and the Great War: XXXXXXXX Threshold of Middle-earth. London: HarperCollins, 2003.Hammond, Wayne G., and Christina Scull. J.R.R. Tolkien: Artist & Illustrator. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1995.———, ed. XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings Fiftieth Anniversary Edition. London:HarperCollins; Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2004.———. XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings: A Reader’s Companion. London: HarperCollins, 2005.Jones, Diana Wynne. “XXXXXXXX Shape of the Narrative in XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings.” In J.R.R. Tolkien: This Far Land, ed. Robert Giddings. London: Vision Press; Totowa, NJ: Barnes & Noble Books, 1983.Kilby, Clyde S. Tolkien and XXXXXXXX Silmarillion. Wheaton, IL: Harold Shaw,1976.Kocher, Paul. Master of Middle-earth: XXXXXXXX Fiction of J.R.R. Tolkien. Boston:Houghton Mifflin Company, 1972.Le Guin, Ursula K. “Rhythmic Pattern in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings.” In Meditations on Middle-earth, ed. Karen Haber. New York: St. Martin’sPress, 2001: 101-116.20John D. Rateliff———. “XXXXXXXX Staring Eye.” In XXXXXXXX Language of the Night: Essays on Fantasyand Science Fiction, ed. Susan Wood. New York: G. P. Putnam’sSons, 1979: 171-4. [Originally published in Vector no. 66/67(1974).]Lewis, C. S. “It All Began With A Picture . . .” In On Stories and Other Essays on Literature, ed. Walter Hooper. New York: Harcourt BraceJovanovich, 1982. [Originally published in Radio Times July 15th1960.]———. “XXXXXXXX Hobbit.” In On Stories and Other Essays on Literature, ed. Walter Hooper. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1982.Lewis, Warren H. Brothers and Friends: XXXXXXXX Diaries of Major Warren HamiltonLewis. ed. Clyde S. Kilby and Marjorie Lamp Mead. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1982.Medcalf, Stephen. “ ‘XXXXXXXX Language Learned of Elves’: Owen Barfield,XXXXXXXX Hobbit, and XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,” VII: An Anglo-American Literary Review, 16 (1999): 31–53.Raffel, Burton. “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings as Literature.” In Tolkien and theCritics: Essays on “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,” ed. Neil D. Issacs andRose A. Zimbardo. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre DamePress, 1968.Rateliff, John D. XXXXXXXX History of XXXXXXXX Hobbit, vol. I: Mr. Baggins. London:HarperCollins; Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2007.———. XXXXXXXX History of XXXXXXXX Hobbit, vol. II: Return to Bag-End. London:HarperCollins; Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 2007.Rosebury, Brian. [Review of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings 1954–2004: Scholarship in Honor of Richard E. Blackwelder.] In Tolkien Studies 4 (2007):282–288.———. Tolkien: A Critical Assessment. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1992.Scull, Christina, and Wayne G. Hammond. XXXXXXXX J.R.R. Tolkien Companion and Guide. Two volumes. London: HarperCollins; Boston:Houghton Mifflin Company, 2006.Shippey, Tom. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. London: HarperCollins, 2000.———. XXXXXXXX Road to Middle-earth. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company,2003.Thompson, Kristin. XXXXXXXX Frodo Franchise: “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings” and Modern21“A Kind of Elvish Craft”: Tolkien as Literary CraftsmanHollywood. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2007.Tolkien, J.R.R. Tolkien On Fairy-stories: Expanded Edition. Ed. Verlyn Fliegerand Douglas A. Anderson. London: HarperCollins, 2008.———. “XXXXXXXX Dragon’s Visit.” Oxford Magazine (February 4 1937) 342.Reprinted in Douglas A. Anderson, XXXXXXXX Annotated Hobbit: 309–311.West, Richard C. “XXXXXXXX Interlace Structure of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings.” InA Tolkien Compass, ed. Jared Lobdell. La Salle, IL: Open Court,1975: 77-94.Wilson, Edmund. “Oo, Those Awful Orcs.” In XXXXXXXX Bit Between My Teeth:A Literary Chronicle of 1950–1965. New York: Farrar, Straus andGiroux, 1965. [Originally published in XXXXXXXX Nation, April 14,1956.]22Douglas A. AndersonJohn D. Rateliff: A ChecklistCOMPILED BY DOUGLAS A. ANDERSONBooksXXXXXXXX History of XXXXXXXX Hobbit: Part One: Mr. BagginsLondon: HarperCollins, 2007Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2007London: HarperCollins, 2008 [trade paper]XXXXXXXX History of XXXXXXXX Hobbit: Part Two: Return to Bag-EndLondon: HarperCollins, 2007Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2007London: HarperCollins, 2008 [trade paper][Errata for these books are published at Rateliff ’s website: <www.sacnothscriptorium.com>]TOLKIEN-RELATED CRITICAL ARTICLES AND REVIEWS[book review, XXXXXXXX Frodo Franchise: XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings and Modern Hollywood (2007), by Kristin Thompson], VII: An Anglo-American Literary Review, 25 (2008): 114-115.[book review, Tolkien’s Oxford (2008) by Robert S. Blackham], Mythprint,45 no. 10/11 (whole no. 319/320; October/November 2008):8-9.[book review, Tolkien’s Shorter Works (2008), edited by Margaret Hiley andFrank Weinreich], Tolkien Studies 6 (2009): 302-308.“ ‘And All the Days of Her Life Are Forgotten’: XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings asMythic Prehistory.” In XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings 1954-2004: Scholarship in Honor of Richard E. Blackwelder, ed. Wayne G. Hammondand Christina Scull. Milwaukee, Wisconsin: Marquette University Press, 2006: 67-100.“ ‘And Something Yet Remains to Be Said’: Tolkien and Williams,” Mythlore, vol. 12 no. 3 (whole number 45; Spring 1986): 48-54.“Early Versions of Farmer Giles of Ham.” In Leaves from the Tree: J.R.R.Tolkien’s Shorter Fiction, by T. A. Shippey, et al. London: TolkienSociety, 1991: 45-48.“ ‘Fastiticalon’ and ‘Cat’: A Problem in Sequencing,” Beyond Bree, August23John Rateliff: A Checklist1987: 1-2 [co-written with Wayne G. Hammond].“Gríma the Wormtongue: Tolkien and His Sources,” Mallorn, no. 25(September 1988): 15-17.“J.R.R. Tolkien: ‘Sir Topas’ Revisited,” Notes and Queries, n.s. vol. 29 no.4 (August 1982): 348.“ ‘A Kind of Elvish Craft’: Tolkien as Literary Craftsman,” Tolkien Studies6 (2009): 1-21.“XXXXXXXX Lost Road, XXXXXXXX Dark Tower, and XXXXXXXX Notion Club Papers: Tolkien andLewis’s Time Travel Triad.” In Tolkien’s Legendarium: Essays onXXXXXXXX History of Middle-earth, ed. Verlyn Flieger and Carl F. Hostetter. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2000: 199-218.“She and Tolkien,” Mythlore, 8 no. 2 (whole number 28; Summer 1981):6-8.“Tolkien for the Masses” [review of Bill Green, Tolkien: Master of Fantasy(1981)], Mythlore, 14 no. 1 (whole number 51; Autumn 1987):49-50.SELECTED OTHER CRITICISM[book review, And God Came In: XXXXXXXX Extraordinary Story of Joy Davidman; HerLife and Marriage to C. S. Lewis (1983), by Lyle W. Dorsett], Christianity & Literature, 33 no. 3 (Spring 1984): 71-73.[book review, Owen Barfield: Romanticism Comes of Age: A Biography (2006),by Simon Blaxland-de Lange], Mythlore, 27 nos. 1/2 (wholenumber 103/104; Fall/Winter 2008): 161-164.[book review, Past Watchful Dragons: Fantasy and Faith in the World of C.S. Lewis (2007), ed. by Amy H. Sturgis], Mythlore, 26 nos. 3/4(whole number 101/102; Spring/Summer 2008): 212-215.“Dragons of Legend,” Dragon Magazine, 21 no. 1 (whole no. 230; June1996): 24-28.“Introduction,” in Eager Spring, by Owen Barfield. [no place]: BarfieldPress UK, 2008: ix-xiii.“XXXXXXXX Kathryn Lindskoog Hoax” [review of XXXXXXXX C. S. Lewis Hoax (1988)by Kathryn Lindskoog], Mythlore, 13 no. 4 (whole number 58;Summer 1989): 53-56.“Owen Barfield: A Short Reading List,” in C. S. Lewis, Owen Barfield: ASouvenir Book for the Centenary Celebration Held at Wheaton, Illinois24Douglas A. AndersonJuly 15-20, 1998 by the Mythopoeic Society. Williamstown, MA:McClelland Press, 1998: 22-25.“Rhetorical Strategies in Charles William’s Prose Play,” in XXXXXXXX Rhetoric ofVision: Essays on Charles Williams, ed. Charles A. Huttar and Peter J. Schakel. Lewisburg, PA: Bucknell University Press, 1996:238-247.SELECTED ONLINE CRITICISM(URLs current as of January 2009):[movie reviews of the three parts Peter Jackson’s XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings: XXXXXXXXFellowship of the Rings (December 2002); XXXXXXXX Two Towers (December 2003);XXXXXXXX Return of the King (December 2004)] Wizards of the Coast website<www.wizards.com>:XXXXXXXX Fellowship of the Ring (2001), three parts:<http://www.wizards.com/dnd/article.asp?x=dnd/dx20020111x><http://www.wizards.com/dnd/article.asp?x=dnd/dx20020118x><http://www.wizards.com/dnd/article.asp?x=dnd/dx20020125x>XXXXXXXX Two Towers (2002), two parts:<http://www.wizards.com/dnd/article.asp?x=dnd/dx20030117x><http://www.wizards.com/dnd/article.asp?x=dnd/dx20030124x>XXXXXXXX Return of the King (2003), two parts:<http://www.wizards.com/default.asp?x=dnd/dnd/20040118a><http://www.wizards.com/default.asp?x=dnd/dnd/20040125a>Classics of Fantasy, monthly online column, August 2002 through January2004. Wizards of the Coast website <www.wizards.com>:I (August 2002). Williams Morris, XXXXXXXX Well at the World’s End (1896)<http://ww2.wizards.com/Books/Wizards/?doc=dnd_classics>II (September 2002). Patricia A. McKillip, XXXXXXXX Forgotten Beasts of Eld (1974)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classics2>III (October 2002). M. R. James, Ghost Stories of an Antiquarian (1904 ff.)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_ghoststories>IV (November 2002). Fritz Leiber, Swords Against Death (1970)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classicsoffantasy>25John Rateliff: A ChecklistV (December 2002). John Myers Myers, Silverlock (1949)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_silverlock>VI (January 2003). David Lindsay, A Voyage to Arcturus (1920)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classics3>VII (February 2003). Barry Hughart, XXXXXXXX Bridge of Birds (1984)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classics8>VIII (March 2003). E. R. Eddison, XXXXXXXX Worm Ouroboros (1922)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classicworm>IX (April 2003). H. P. Lovecraft, XXXXXXXX Dream-Quest of Unknown Kadath (1926)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classicsdreamquest>X (May 2003). Ursula K. Le Guin, A Wizard of Earthsea (1968)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classicswizardearthsea>XI (June 2003). John Bellairs, XXXXXXXX Face in the Frost (1969)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classicsfacefrost>XII (July 2003). William Hope Hodgson, XXXXXXXX Night Land (1912)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classicsnightland>XIII (August 2003). Richard Adams, Watership Down (1972)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classicswatership>XIV (September 2003). Kenneth Morris, XXXXXXXX Book of Three Dragons (1930)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classicsbook3dragons>XV (October 2003). Clark Ashton Smith, Tales of Averoigne (1929 ff.)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classicsaveroigne>XVI (November 2003). Lord Dunsany,XXXXXXXX Books of Wonder(1910, 1912, 1916)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classicsdunsany>26Douglas A. AndersonXVII (December 2003). J.R.R. Tolkien, XXXXXXXX Hobbit (1937)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classicshobbit>XVIII (January 2004). Katharine Briggs, Hobberty Dick (1955)<http://ww2.wizards.com/books/Wizards/default.aspx?doc=main_classicshobberdy>27Copyright © West Virginia University PressTalk to the Dragon: Tolkien as TranslatorÁRMANN JAKOBSSONIn chapter 12 of Smaug, the object of his and his companions’ quest. This encounter XXXXXXXX Hobbit, Bilbo Baggins finally meets the dragonwith the dragon is in a sense both the climax and the anti-climax ofthe story. It is also a turning point, both structurally and morally. XXXXXXXXstory has up to this point been episodic in structure, a travel narrativewith each adventure coming on top of the previous one, as Bilbo andthe dwarves travel to XXXXXXXX Lonely Mountain (Erebor). It has also beenmorally simple for the most part, with Bilbo and his companions as unambiguous protagonists, facing various kinds of evils (goblins, wolves,spiders and hostile elves). After the meeting with the dragon, however,the narrative becomes more unexpected, entangled, ambiguous, and political, culminating in the hostile encounter between Bilbo’s companionsand the elves and men of Lake Town (Esgaroth), and Bilbo’s subsequentbetrayal of his dwarf friends.1In this article, I will analyze the encounter between Bilbo and Smaug,trying to come closer to the identity and the origins of the dragon. I willshow how Tolkien is acting as a translator of a kind, by which I mean thathe is using Old Norse sources not only as an inspiration for this scene,but that he also gathers a subtext from them, making his dragon muchmore ambiguous and still more frightening a brutish beast. I will arguethat Smaug the dragon might be regarded as an uncanny monster andthat this uncanny aspect of the dragon is present not only in XXXXXXXX Hobbitbut also in its major source, the Old Norse poem Fáfnismál. Thus Tolkienis acting as a translator not only of motifs but also of ideas, and even ofeerie feelings.2When Bilbo, and the readers of XXXXXXXX Hobbit, are confronted with thedragon, they are in for a surprise, as Smaug’s behaviour is somewhat unusual for a dragon. Dragons are an ancient and fairly ubiquitous culturalphenomenon, the origins of which are extremely hard to trace.3 Tolkienclearly expected his readers to be a little familiar with dragons: variousstatements made in the book suggest that he is addressing an audiencewith some previous knowledge of said species, in theory if not practice.4This ideal audience would not have been surprised to see Tolkien’s dragon as depicted in the book: a huge, scaly, fire-breathing, flying monstrosity, resting on its treasure.5 This is what a dragon should be like, and infour out of the five times that Tolkien’s dragon appears it behaves moreor less as a ‘generic’ dragon might be expected to, wrecking things without giving much thought to it. If anything, the dragon is pleased about28Ármann Jakobssonthe destruction it wreaks, which is unsurprising, since dragons are evilmonsters and being dangerous and destructive is their role. And Smaug,the dragon in XXXXXXXX Hobbit, lives up to this expectation. He turns out to beas bestial and as monstrous as the best of dragons.Evil monster he is indeed, but how? It is the fifth scene, in whichmy interest lies, the one where Tolkien’s dragon might be said to defyexpectations. Initially, the dragon is mentioned as the main antagonistof the dwarves visiting Bilbo Baggins, as the object of their quest andas a destroyer and killer whose death they desire. XXXXXXXX actual encounterwith the dragon keeps being postponed as the quest proceeds, with trollsand goblins and wolves and spiders and elves—but no dragons, until thestory is well advanced. XXXXXXXXn, finally, Bilbo Baggins has to walk into thedragon’s lair (happily invisible, though) and steal something from it, onlyto bring the dragon’s wrath upon himself and the dwarves, who all nevertheless escape from it—the dragon eats their ponies instead.6 And it isat that point in the narrative that Bilbo is again sent to face the dragon.This time, it is awake and it speaks—and I will now have to stop referringto the dragon as “it,” since he has started speaking.When the dragon starts to speak, the reader cannot escape the feelingthat this is a climactic event which turns the expected storyline upsidedown:Smaug certainly looked fast asleep, almost dead and dark,with scarcely a snore more than a whiff of unseen steam,when Bilbo peeped once more from the entrance. He wasjust about to step out on to the floor when he caught a sudden thin and piercing ray of red from under the droopinglid of Smaug’s left eye. He was only pretending to sleep! Hewas watching the tunnel entrance! Hurriedly Bilbo steppedback and blessed the luck of his ring. XXXXXXXXn Smaug spoke.(H, XII, 211–12)Readers are probably expected to be a bit taken back by the words “XXXXXXXXnSmaug spoke”, at the end of this paragraph—they are, as it were, muchlike a punch-line (or surprise) of an Elizabethan sonnet.It seems likely that many readers of XXXXXXXX Hobbit would start out regarding dragons as belonging to the animal kingdom, mythical to besure, but beasts nonetheless. Tolkien’s dragon, on the other hand, is not abeast. XXXXXXXX moment it speaks, it becomes a character, an intelligent person who is not merely governed by his bestial instincts. XXXXXXXX dragon stillretains these bestial instincts, though. Indeed he soon refers to his havingfeasted on dwarves (his exact words are: “I know the smell (and taste) ofdwarf—no one better” (H, XII, 213)—which is tantamount to cannibalism, since dwarves are also intelligent and speaking creatures.7 Thus,29Talk to the Dragon: Tolkien as TranslatorTolkien’s dragon is actually a hybrid: part man, part beast, a chimera or afinngálkn in Old Norse.8 Still, in spite of his wildness, the dragon turns outto be quite a conversationalist: curious, polite, clever, and subtle.When dragons start to talk, they are transposed into the world of humans, of those who possess the ability to speak and to converse. And for aconversation to take place, the two (or more) people involved need somecommon ground. Most importantly, they need a common language (and,perhaps surprisingly but probably mainly for the sake of the storyline,dragons and hobbits share a language in XXXXXXXX Hobbit); secondly, they needsome common points of reference. And these turn out to be possible forBilbo and the dragon when they meet for the second time and start talking to each other.It is not so much the fact that the dragon speaks that makes Bilbo’sconversation with dragon surprising but how he speaks: the dragon isclever and subtle and formidable in an eerie way. This opens up a Pandora’s Box of new and uncanny possibilities: is the dragon perhaps humanin some way? Is he, heaven forbid, one of us?While Tolkien was writing XXXXXXXX Hobbit, he also composed his famousessay “Beowulf: XXXXXXXX Monsters and the Critics” (the Israel Gollancz lecture of 1936), and he was, very rarely for a serious scholar of that age,quite preoccupied with monsters (as his essay bears witness, most wouldhave considered monsters folkloristic and frivolous). Unlike most of thecritics of Beowulf, Tolkien liked the hero’s monster battles, arguing thatthe inhumanity of the antagonists (and their more elemental nature) isnot just a plebeian descent into folktales belonging in the nursery, but adevice which made the story larger and more significant.In this lecture, Tolkien also ponders the relationship between monstrosity and otherness, a very common preoccupation in modern monsterstudies.9 To simplify, we can distinguish between two types of monsters,which are exemplified in Beowulf by the dragon that Beowulf dies fighting and by Grendel and his mother, the monstrous antagonists in the firstpart of the poem.XXXXXXXXre is, on one hand, the monster which is the complete Other,as one might initially regard the Beowulfian dragon. A giant tarantulawould fit into this category, as would Godzilla and perhaps the Alienfrom Ridley Scott’s influential film of the same name. No affinity betweenman and monster seems possible.10 XXXXXXXX other type is the monster as ourdouble, human monsters, such as Grendel. Robert Louis Stevenson’s MrHyde is the obvious example but all speaking monsters belong in someway to this category.11 XXXXXXXX same would seem to apply to shapeshifters, awell-known category of medieval monsters, which includes werewolvesand, perhaps, berserkers.12A dragon such as Smaug is an interesting case in point. At first sight,30Ármann Jakobssonit (and in this context we have to refer to Smaug as “it”) seems to belongin the category of the monstrous Other, that set of monsters who arecompletely and utterly alien to us.13 Of course, dragons would initiallyseem to belong to the utterly alien, and it is easy to argue why, sincedragons do not resemble humans in the slightest: they are slithery, flying,fire-breathing serpents. From the modern biological point of view, humans and serpents are not even slightly related—the actual relationshipbetween the two is considerably weaker than that which exists, say, between humans and apes, while in the Northern Middle Ages it was usually bears and wolves that were seen as somehow akin to the human race.Still, there are also Old Norse cases of humans and serpents belonging tothe same family, including most notoriously the originally human dragonFáfnir, whom I will discuss below.When Tolkien’s dragon starts to speak, it has moved, perhaps unexpectedly, into the other category, the monster as our double.14 Smaugthen becomes Mr. Hyde, Dracula, Frankenstein’s monster—all thesewell-known figures of the popular culture of the 1930’s, to which Tolkien, whether he would have seen it that way or not, also belongs.15 Tolkien is doing new things with the concept of the dragon. He is, in a way,neutralizing the opposition between the human and the monstrous, or, atleast, moving the dragon between categories, using it to reflect somethingthat can also be found in humans.16As scholars have noted, the notion of the talking dragon comes fromthe poem Fáfnismál, as well as from Völsunga saga where Fáfnismál is usedas a source.17 This is hardly surprising, since Tolkien himself actually saysin XXXXXXXX Monsters and the Critics that “dragons, real dragons, essential both tothe machinery and the ideas of a poem or tale, are actually rare. In thenorthern literature there are only two that are significant. . . . we have butthe dragon of the Volsungs, Fafnir, and Beowulf ’s bane” (MC 11).18XXXXXXXX clue is almost superfluous: for anyone who knows both XXXXXXXX Hobbit and Fáfnismál, the conversation between the hero and the dragon inthe former is obviously modelled on and inspired by the latter.19 As anextension of this observation, I will argue that the uncanny aspects of themonster Smaug, how it is familiar and unfamiliar at the same time, 20 arealso present in Fáfnismál and that Tolkien is, as it were, translating themto suit the needs of a modern novel.Fáfnismál is a part of the story of the dragonslayer Sigurðr in thePoetic Edda. Sigurðr killed the mighty dragon Fáfnir, but, as the Eddicpoems are for the most part more interested in conversations than deeds,this is not really the main subject of the poem, which instead focuses onSigurðr’s conversation with the dying dragon. Fáfnismál, even in comparison with other Eddic poems, is obscure to the point of being completelybaffling. For example, Sigurðr starts off by cleverly concealing his name31Talk to the Dragon: Tolkien as Translator(calling himself “gfvgt dyr” [a noble animal]), only to reveal it unnecessarily a little later.21Throughout the poem, readers will be prone to get an eerie feelingthat the dragon is somehow outwitting Sigurðr, as Smaug also outwitsBilbo in XXXXXXXX Hobbit, or at least thinks he does, even though the hobbitcertainly has the last laugh. In Fáfnismál, the dragon certainly has the upper hand in the beginning. Though in his dying throes, he asks aggressiveand clever questions, mostly attempting to wrest out of the young herothe identity of the man who he thinks has put him up to this (the dragon’sown brother Reginn), whilst warning him against the curse of the gold.XXXXXXXX dragon’s last words are that if Sigurðr is not careful, they will bothend up being killed by the same man. That would entail a strange sharing of fate for the dragon and his slayer, but, as the myth of Fáfnismál hasit, they do have a lot in common: not just Reginn, but the gold and theviolence by which they live. Fáfnir was, according to the Eddas, originallya human who was transformed into a dragon to keep his gold safe. Thusin Fáfnismál we do not have a dragon as a complete Other. In fact, thedragon and the hero might be said to share a curious affinity with eachother, even a family relationship, since they both have an intimate connection with Reginn.22Tolkien, when writing his narrative of the encounter with the dragon,is, in a sense, acting as translator. He is not translating Fáfnismál directlyto English,23 but he is translating its essence for inclusion in a modernnovel (and for all its medieval learning XXXXXXXX Hobbit is quite modern andwas arguably ahead of its time in 1937).24 His dragon, although its human origins remain unspecified, is strangely and unnervingly human,like Fáfnir. And Bilbo, faced with the daunting experience of having hisfirst talk with a dragon, resorts to the same methods as Sigurðr does, thatis speaking in riddles. Clearly humorously alluding to Fáfnismál, the narrator applauds Bilbo’s decision to speak in riddles: “This of course is theway to talk to a dragon, if you don’t want to reveal your proper name(which is wise) and don’t want to infuriate them by a flat refusal (which isalso very wise). No dragon can resist the fascination of riddling talk andof wasting time trying to understand it” (H, XII, 213).While Bilbo does a slightly better job with the riddles than Sigurðr,he still unintentionally reveals some things to the clever dragon that hedid not want to, who realizes from one of the riddle-names Bilbo inventsfor himself that he has received the hospitality of the people of the laketown Esgaroth.XXXXXXXX conversation actually gets close to comical at one point whenBilbo becomes lofty in his riddle-making, while the dragon keeps interrupting him with down-to-earth remarks, much in the way of a gruffschool-teacher, or King Haraldr hard-ruler during the first performance32Ármann Jakobssonof Magnússdrápa hrynhenda.25 One example:“I come from under the hill, and under the hills and overthe hills my paths led. And through the air, I am he thatwalks unseen.”“So I can well believe,” said Smaug, “but that is hardlyyour usual name.”“I am the clue-finder, the web-cutter, the stinging fly. Iwas chosen for the lucky number.”“Lovely titles!” sneered the dragon. “But lucky numbersdon’t always come off.” (H, XII, 212)Bilbo is obviously trying to impress the dragon, as a young man mightwish to impress a paternal figure, whereas one cannot really imagine oneself trying to impress Godzilla.26Both Bilbo and Sigurðr run into trouble because their dragons areslippery, their answers unexpected and both gently goad their heroesinto revealing more: Smaug by snorting “lovely titles!”—whereas whenSigurðr claims to be both motherless and fatherless, it is Fáfnir’s turn tosnort: “af hverio vartv vndri alinn” [what wonder begat you?] (stanza3).27 Both dragons also warn the hero about the treachery of his comrades. And, as XXXXXXXX Hobbit has it, Bilbo was in dire risk of falling under thedragon’s spell (H, XII, 214).XXXXXXXX subtext about parentage in Fáfnismál aids in rendering the dragon no simple monster.28 It is no coincidence that the dragon begins byasking about Sigurðr’s parents, since Sigurðr has actually been broughtto Gnitaheiði by his foster-father and mentor, Reginn, who is the brotherof the dragon Fáfnir. As Reginn’s brother, Fáfnir easily becomes a surrogate parent to Sigurðr as well, and their conversation bears witness toit: this dragon is not merely a monster in the wilderness. He is a teacher,a respectable figure, and he also has magical powers.29 He is a thing ofsorcery and that means that he is terrible. XXXXXXXX dragon-spell is not only agimmick that the dragon possesses to make him a more formidable adversary. It also reminds us that there is in the hearts of others (certainly inthe hearts of the dwarves, and, as it turns out, also in the heart of Bilbo) atiny essence of the dragon, that draconitas which made it possible for Fáfnir to turn himself into a dragon.30 As Jonathan Evans has remarked, themain function of the dragon in the Old Germanic world was as a legendary or even mythic symbol of greed,31 and in XXXXXXXX Hobbit we have a goodexample of this in the tragic fate of the master of Esgaroth who dies from“dragon-sickness” in the epilogue of the narrative (H, XIX, 285).XXXXXXXXre is one major difference between the two protagonists. Bilbo isafraid, as described shortly before he meets the dragon: “It was at thispoint that Bilbo stopped. Going on from there was the bravest thing he33Talk to the Dragon: Tolkien as Translatorever did. XXXXXXXX tremendous things that happened afterward were as nothing compared to it. He fought the real battle in the tunnel alone, beforehe ever saw the vast danger that lay in wait” (H, XII, 205). Bilbo’s passage through the tunnel is loaded with symbolic meaning, as everyonewould recognize in our post-Freudian age.32 We do not even really needto be inspired by Freud to see the tunnel as an image of birth: in the tunnel, Bilbo is born as a hero. What does he then meet in the bright worldbeyond? He enters the lair of the dragon, the brightness of which is explained by the treasure, and encounters a big strangely familiar creaturethat is intimidating and whose motives are unclear.This Freudian birth imagery is connected to the idea that the dragonmay become a somewhat twisted paternal figure to the hero, not onlyin Fáfnismál, where the dragon is actually the brother of Sigurðr’s father-figure Reginn, but also in XXXXXXXX Hobbit. One way for a budding heroto become a man is slaying a dragon, as Sigurðr Fáfnisbani does (andRagnar, the hero of Ragnars saga loðbrókar as well), an idea that Tolkienmust mainly have gathered from Fáfnismál. It clearly has an added significance that Fáfnismál starts with Fáfnir asking his slayer about his birth.He wants to know not who Sigurðr is, but whose son he is. And afterthat, Sigurðr and Fáfnir spend the first five stanzas of the poem repeating the words “father” and “son”. XXXXXXXXy go on to discuss the curse of thegold and Sigurðr’s eventual death. Sigurður seems somewhat at a loss asto how to acquit himself when conversing with dragons throughout thedialogue with Fáfnir, but he still wants to gain wisdom from this wise oldcreature.33 XXXXXXXX first thing he asks him is about the origins of the nornswho “kjósa mǫþr fra mgum” [sunder mother and son] (stanza 12).34Birth, fatherhood, motherhood and death seem to be foremost in Sigurðr’s mind when faced with the dragon.Curiously, Bilbo too when he confronts the dragon, starts thinkingabout his own father, who is otherwise a shadowy figure in XXXXXXXX Hobbit,and, indeed, in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings: “Perhaps something will turn up.‘Every worm has his weak spot, as my father used to say’” (H, XII, p.211). By remembering things that his father told him, he finds the weakspot on the dragon’s belly, making his father a part of his confrontation with the dragon. In XXXXXXXX Hobbit, the dragon is certainly not such apalpable father figure as Fáfnir is in Fáfnismál, but I would contend thatthe subtext is still there, as is evident in the passage quoted above whereBilbo’s riddling talk is tested by the dragon. From Fáfnismál Smaug carrieswith him some of the aura of an evil ancestor, familiar and unfamiliar atthe same time, and his uncanny status in the conflict owes something tothis “ancestry” of the text XXXXXXXX Hobbit as a “translation” of Fáfnismál. Wereit not for the ambiguous and perversely paternal role Smaug has, Bilbomight not have needed to bring his biological father into the lair with him34Ármann Jakobssonto confront this antagonist.XXXXXXXX parental role of the dragon is less overt in XXXXXXXX Hobbit than inFáfnismál and it is important to keep in mind that the dialogue betweenthe two dragons and their antagonists also differs in many other respects.Even so, one might still say that Tolkien has picked up themes and evenan uncanny atmosphere from Fáfnismál and thus translated the old poeminto a narrative fit for his own tale.XXXXXXXX most important thing that Tolkien gained from Fáfnismál is thatthe conversation between the dragon and the hero and the intellectualgame they play moves the dragon from one monster category to theother. XXXXXXXX dragon is no longer merely terrible and bestial, he now alsobecomes uncanny, strange and yet familiar, human and yet not human,acting almost as if he is Bilbo’s parent and teacher and not merely amonster in the wilderness. An uncanny relationship is thus establishedbetween the hero and the dragon. XXXXXXXX duel with the monster becomes aduel of wits, an idea not perhaps central to the Sigurðr myth as such butcertainly central to Fáfnismál.Tolkien is translating not only the conversation between buddinghero and dragon from the Old Norse, but also that dialogue’s alarmingsub-text. Tolkien’s dragon becomes both monstrous and uncanny. Hisintelligence and his command of language, his strange familiarity, makeshis appetite for dwarves, his cannibalism as it were, seem more eerie andmore subtly frightening. This monster is not just terrifying, it is a partof us. We can talk to it because there is a revolting but real connectionbetween man and monster.NOTESThis article was originally written as a paper for the International Mediaeval Conference in Leeds and presented in a session organized by CarlPhelpstead (with him and Dimitra Fini as the other speakers) in July2007.1 Tolkien wrote XXXXXXXX Hobbit in two stages and the last part of the novelonly after having been approached by publishers (Carpenter 183–84;this has been challenged by Rateliff I, xi–xviii). I have argued previously (Tolkien og Hringurinn, 41–42) that this part of the narrativecompletely transforms the book, as it enhances both its structuralcomplexity and its irony, as the fight at one point suddenly is not between good and evil anymore but rather between various factions ofthe good races; see also Shippey (Road 76).2 I am treading the path of recent monster theory (Cohen 4) byexamining the monster both as a construct and a projection. XXXXXXXX35Talk to the Dragon: Tolkien as Translatoridea of Tolkien as a ‘translator’ in a sense pervades the work of T.A.Shippey (see esp. Road) as well.3 XXXXXXXX most extensive study of Indo-European dragon slaying myths isWatkins, (esp. 297–303).4 E.g. “If you have ever seen a dragon in a pinch you will realise thatthis was only poetical exaggeration applied to any hobbit” (H, I, 27);“Dragons steal gold and jewels, you know” (H, I, 32); “dragons mustsleep sometimes, I suppose” (H, I, 35).5 Smaug is described in H, xii, 205–6 and again on page 212–16.6 This probably seems rather wicked to most readers, except Icelanders, who have been eating ponies for centuries.7 This would depend on how cannibalism is defined. On the one hand,dragons and dwarves do not belong to the same species. On the other,one sapient (talking) animal eating another violates the same normsthat cannibalism does, as C. S. Lewis, Tolkien’s friend and ally, suggests in XXXXXXXX Silver Chair (113).8 On this Icelandic monster type and its metaphorical use, see EinarSigmarsson.9 See e.g.: “Triumph over the lesser and more nearly human is cancelled by defeat before the older and more elemental” (MC 34).10 Many monsters of popular culture seem at first to belong to this type,although perhaps wrongly, with King Kong as a good example (onemay keep in mind that the famous 1933 film is contemporary to theXXXXXXXX Hobbit).11 Tolkien’s Orcs are a good example, however deformed they are madeto look by the film make-up artists.12 This category of human monsters would also seem to incorporatethe Old Norse giants, who are not only the gods’ main antagonistsbut also their ancestors and relations by marriage, see e.g. Jakobsson(“Contest”).13 And yet, as Samantha Riches has recently reminded us, animals inliterature are never wholly similar to and never entirely different fromhumans (199).14 Tolkien preferred not to think of dragons as animals (“as a soberzoologist,” as he phrases it himself) (MC 11).15 On the monster culture of the 1930s, see Skal (esp. 113–209).36Ármann Jakobsson16 On Tolkien’s recurrent interest in dragons, see Rateliff (II, 525–34).He later created a second and very different dragon, ChrysophylaxDives, a character in Farmer Giles of Ham (published 1949, but actuallywritten in 1937, in the midst of Tolkien’s preoccupation with dragons). Chrysophylax is in some ways even more human than Smaug,although he retains some bestial qualities.17 See e.g. Shippey (Road, 82; Author, 36).18 This is a hyperbole, as demonstrated by Evans (221) but Tolkien isnot entirely wrong; these are the two most important dragon characters from Old Germanic culture and undoubtedly the ones thathe used when creating Smaug. Only Fáfnir in Fáfnismál speaks, butthe Beowulf dragon may also be said to possess a somewhat humanpersonality; when its cup has been stolen, it does not only scour thevicinity, searching for the thief, it also goes to its treasure mound tosee if it has not simply mislaid it.19 I am not suggesting that Fáfnismál is the only model for Ch. 12 of XXXXXXXXHobbit; other influences have also been noted but are of less interestto this study.20 In his 1919 essay, Freud defines the uncanny as that which is familiar and yet strange, thus frightening (CPW XVII, 220). As Royle hasrecently shown, Freud’s depiction of the uncanny is complex andfull of ambiguities, but this simple definition will have to do for ourpurposes.21 Norrœn fornkvæði (219–20).22 Fáfnismál is in itself a very complex narrative and it is also a part of acomplex narrative cycle where the most complicated part is the moment between the dragon-slaying and the double marriages that latertake place between Sigurðr, Brynhildr, Guðrún and Gunnarr (see e.g.Andersson).23 In the same way, he is not directly translating Beowulf when he borrows from it theft of the golden cup for XXXXXXXX Hobbit (and Tolkien somewhat disingenuously denied having been thinking of Beowulf at allwhen he wrote that scene, see Letters [31]).24 Its lack of a preaching tone is comparable to the contemporary worksof Enid Blyton who became somewhat unfairly notorious for adopting her audience’s point of view. For good arguments as to how Tolkien is very much a twentieth century novelist, see Rosebury (147–57)and Shippey (Author, 310–18).37Talk to the Dragon: Tolkien as Translator25 Morkinskinna, (116–18).26 Shippey has also remarked that the “familiarity” of Smaug’s speechsuggests an unsettling connection between man and monsters (Road,84).27 Norrœn fornkvæði (220).28 Evans has noted that the motif of the dragon as a transformed manserves to ambiguate the categorial binarism of the opposition between man and monster and thus it is also possible to see the heroand the dragon as “doubles” (250–56; see also Lionarons).29 As Tom Shippey has noted the dragon’s speech has echoes of the“aggressive politeness of the British upper class” (Road, 83; Author,37–38).30 This is suggested already in the first chapter by his reaction to thesong of the dwarves (H, I, 25).31 Evans (263). He also discusses monstrous transformations of greed indepth in his excellent study of the Old Germanic dragon (248–61).32 As Freud explains (CPW V, 397), he is not claiming any originality inspotting these symbols; he expects e.g. narrow passages and closeddoors to be recognized as well-known or obvious symbols for the vagina. Even though Freud and Tolkien were far removed from eachother as scholars, it is not unlikely that Tolkien was at least aware ofthe possibility of such an interpretation.33 Cf. Evans (265).34 Norrœn fornkvæði (221).WORKS CITEDAndersson, XXXXXXXXodore M. XXXXXXXX Legend of Brynhild. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 1980.Carpenter, Humphrey. J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography. London: Unwin, 1977[repr. 1989].Cohen, Jeffrey Jerome. “Monster Culture (Seven XXXXXXXXses).” In MonsterXXXXXXXXory: Reading Culture. Minneapolis: University of MinnesotaPress, 1996: 3–25.Einar Sigmarsson. “Hamskipti eða endaskipti?: Um nykur og nykrað,finngálkn og finngálknað.” Gripla 16 (2005): 287–98.38Ármann JakobssonEvans, Jonathan. “As Rare As XXXXXXXXy are Dire: Old Norse Dragons, Beowulf, and the Deutsche Mythologie.” In XXXXXXXX Shadow-Walkers:Jacob Grimm’s Mythology of the Monstrous, ed. Tom Shippey. Tempe, AZ: Arizona Center for Medieval and Renaissance Studies,2005: 207–69.Freud, Sigmund. XXXXXXXX Complete Psychological Works V, ed. by James Strachey,Anna Freud, Alix Strachey and Alan Tyson. London: Hogarth,1953 [repr. 1973].———. XXXXXXXX Complete Psychological Works XVII, ed. by James Strachey,Anna Freud, Alix Strachey and Alan Tyson. London: Hogarth,1955 [repr. 1973].Jakobsson, Ármann. Tolkien og Hringurinn. Reykjavík: Forlagið, 2003.———. “A Contest of Cosmic Fathers: God and Giant in Vafþrúðnismál.”Neophilologus 92 (2008): 263–77.Lewis, C. S. XXXXXXXX Silver Chair. Glasgow: Fontana Lions, 1980.Lionarons, Joyce Tally. “Beowulf: Myth and Monsters.” English Studies 77(1996): 1–14.Morkinskinna, ed. Finnur Jónsson. Copenhagen: Samfund til Udgivelse afGammel Nordisk Litteratur, 1932.Norrœn fornkvæði, ed. Sophus Bugge. Oslo: Universitetsforlaget, 1867 [repr.1965].Rateliff, John D. XXXXXXXX History of the Hobbit I–II. London: Harper Collins,2007.Riches, Samantha E.J. “Encountering the Monstrous: Saints and Dragons in Medieval Thought.” In XXXXXXXX Monstrous Middle Ages, ed. Bettina Bildhauer and Robert Mills. Cardiff: University of WalesPress, 2003: 196–218.Rosebury, Brian. Tolkien: A Cultural Phenomenon. Basingstoke: Palgrave,2003.Royle, Nicholas. XXXXXXXX Uncanny. Manchester: Manchester University Press,2003.Shippey, Tom. XXXXXXXX Road to Middle-earth. 2nd edition. London: Grafton,1992.———. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. London: Harper Collins,2000.39Talk to the Dragon: Tolkien as TranslatorSkal, David J. XXXXXXXX Monster Show: A Cultural History of Horror. London: Plexus, 1993.Watkins, Calvert. How to Kill a Dragon: Aspects of Indo-European Poetics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995.41Copyright © West Virginia University PressA “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Divisionof Lit. and Lang.JILL FITZGERALDIn 1931, Tolkien delivered a lecture to the Philological Society of Ox ford titled, “Chaucer as a Philologist: XXXXXXXX Reeve’s Tale,” which was sub- -sequently published in 1934 and recently reprinted by Tolkien Studies in2008.1 This paper hopes to complement that reprint by setting Tolkien’slecture within his professional context at the time of its delivery and, additionally, by examining the role Chaucer played in Tolkien’s scholarlyand creative works. Tolkien’s essay “Chaucer as a Philologist” is perhapsthe most comprehensive account of the dialectic variations in XXXXXXXX Reeve’sTale to date. Beneath its detailed surface argument, it is also a tonguein-cheek attempt by Tolkien to convince his audience (and certainly hisskeptics) that Chaucer was philologically savvy, and would have felt rightat home within the Oxford “language school.” A year before deliveringthis lecture Tolkien had weighed in on the long-standing pedagogicaldispute between the programs known as “Lit.” and “Lang.” in an article for XXXXXXXX Oxford Magazine. He wrote: “In the English School, owingto the accidents of history, the distinction between philology and literature is notoriously marked . . . its branches are customarily but looselydubbed the ‘language’ and ‘literature’ side—titles which never were accurate, fortunately for both. History may explain their arising, but provides no defence for their retention” (778). As Tolkien implies, this debatehad its roots in the Oxford English Department’s fledgling years duringthe nineteenth century, and continued to intensify in the years betweenWorld War I and World War II.It is no secret that Tolkien’s anxiety over the state of philologicalstudies at the university level was career-long, but aspects of his attitudeabout Lit. and Lang. are still in need of a fuller explanation. His underlying objective for the “Chaucer as a Philologist” lecture was not simplyto pull the rug out from under those on the side of Lit. at Oxford, butalso to demonstrate that the most compelling literary criticism rests on asubstantive philological understanding.It is hard to tell if the Lit. and Lang. feud had a distinct origin.2 InXXXXXXXX Rise of English Studies (1965), D. J. Palmer documents that as far backas 1887, the split between philology and literature was, in reality, a splitbetween those who studied the literature of the Middle Ages and thosewho read classical and modern literature. As for the anxiety surroundinglanguage studies, one extreme of this attitude is expressed by John Churton Collins: “An English school will grow up, nourishing our language42Jill Fitzgeraldnot from the humanity of the Greeks and the Romans, but from thesavagery of the Goths and Anglo-Saxons. We are about to reverse theRenaissance” (Palmer 101). Attitudes such as this one were not uncommon, and only forced philology into a category that grew increasinglysynonymous with the pejorative connotations of the “dark ages” in thefollowing decades. Yet, despite all the apparent drama, professors like D.B. Monro, W. P. Ker, Henry Nettleship, and C. H. Firth were activelyconcerned about giving equal weight to both language and literature.Nettleship published a pamphlet arguing that “whatever temporary misunderstandings may arise between them [philology] is a necessary adjunct to the study of literature” (Palmer 104). His argument fell on deafears, however, and was shortly followed up by Collins’ rebuttal titled,“Philology versus Literature.”In 1905, W. A. Raleigh and A. S. Napier oversaw a structural reorganization of the English School at Oxford with the intention of keeping Lit. and Lang. from being exclusively identified with medieval andmodern periods respectively. XXXXXXXXir system aimed to provide English majors with something equivalent to modern “concentrations.” XXXXXXXX reformproposal, known as “bifurcation,” allowed separate schemes for thoseperusing language study and “those who chose to specialize in literature(the great majority)” (Palmer 128). It was submitted in 1905, and subsequently passed in 1906 (129). But questions over how to balance Lit.and Lang. never went away entirely. By Tolkien’s time, lines had beenconspicuously drawn.XXXXXXXX ideological and pedagogical quarrels of the nineteenth centurywere only exacerbated in the twentieth as German nationalism and Germanic philology widened the fault lines in the years leading up to WorldWar I. Philology had a strong presence in German institutions, and wascommonly regarded as a uniquely German science grounded in the comparative study of languages. Many were uneasy about philology becausethey felt the study’s application did not always lead to an understandingof linguistic evolution, but rather to a comparison of cultures which, byextension, translated into national pride in the language of a particularpeople. Richard Utz argues in Chaucer and the Discourse of German Philologythat the German philological impulse was acutely tied to two convictions,the first being that “philological discourse was a home-grown Germanproduct superior to any methodologies in other countries.” Utz’s secondpoint stresses the connection between the institution and the state: “bypractising and exporting this kind of superior methodology [Germanywas] contributing, in the academic arena, to [its] rise to importance asa powerful modern nation state” (13). It is in this context that Chaucermakes an appearance in philological debates.Two early advocates of Chaucerphilologie were Bernhard ten Brink,43A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.Chair of English Philology at the University of Straßburg, and Julius Zupitza, Professor at the University of Berlin. Both professors were knownfor notoriously long examinations of linguistic minutiae in their scholarship. Both ten Brink and Zupitza eventually published separate criticaleditions of Chaucer’s General Prologue (Utz 45). According to Utz, a number of German philologists felt that “a close link between Chaucer andGermany” (101) should be forged. This impulse mirrors attempts madeby philologists several decades earlier to appropriate “ownership” of Beowulf through linguistic and cultural analysis.3Utz posits that there was a distinctly “sardonic tone in German responses to much British work in Early English studies” (109), and thatscholars such as Ewald Flügel and John Koch were some of those wholed the charge to construct German philological practices as exclusivelyGerman. Another editor of Chaucer, Arnold Shröer, insisted “on theprimacy of German philological scholarship. . . [and] the amateurism of[the] English counterparts.” Efforts to monopolize the study of philologyin German institutions continued well into the 1920s and 1930s, even asboth American and British philological studies were consciously beingphased out of universities (Utz 119).After World War I, the word “philology,” especially “comparativephilology” (or vergleichende Philologie), came to be viewed as problematicin the minds of some because it had been used as a tool for critiquing“superior” and “inferior” languages and nations. Although much of thedamage had already been done, it took scholars like Tolkien and R. W.Chambers to call attention to this unhealthy and unnecessary association between philology and nationalism. In 1923, Chambers contendedthat “philology itself, conceived as a purely German invention, is in somequarters treated as it were one of the things that the late war was foughtto end” (36). Scholars certainly faced an uphill battle if medieval literature and philology were going to persist at universities. Nonetheless, touse Tolkien’s allegory, philology was moreover a reconstructive practiceby which the “old stones” could remake the “tower” (MC 8). Tolkien’sperspective, that philology offered the foundational material on which tobuild broader literary insights, is advocated in his “Chaucer as a Philologist” presentation to the Philological Society by highlighting how philology does not trump, but instead complements well-rounded literarycriticism.In June 1925, when Tolkien applied for the Rawlinson and BosworthChair of Anglo-Saxon, there was an obvious imbalance in the OxfordEnglish program between students who studied literature and thosewho opted for language study. In his letter to the electors, Tolkien wroteglowingly about his successes with the linguistic program during his fiveshort years at Leeds, noting in particular that the number of students in44Jill Fitzgeraldlinguistics rose from five to twenty.4 Tolkien wrote: “Philology, indeed,appears to have lost for these students its connotations of terror if notof mystery” (Letters 13). He firmly states near the end that “if elected . . .I should endeavor . . . to advance, to the best of my ability, the growingneighbourliness of linguistic and literary studies, which can never be enemies except by misunderstanding or without loss to both” (13).Tolkien may have publicly advocated cooperation between Lit. andLang., but privately he harbored frustrations. For instance, in the Songs forthe Philologists (1936), Tolkien wrote a poem called “Two Little Schemes,”with an alternative title “Lit. and Lang.” While his tone in this poem isharshly satirical, it should be noted that, in reality, Tolkien did not scornhis Lit. students. In later years he became less adamant and, in 1967,Tolkien wrote a poem commending W. H. Auden, one of his eager pupils who received terrible grades for Lang., but excelled in and felt morecomfortable with Lit.5 Although Tolkien did not shy away from taking aside in the Lit. and Lang. debate, it is also evident that he perceived muchof the quarreling as counterproductive, and felt bewilderment over howthe two came to be divided in the first place.Five years after arriving at Oxford, Tolkien was proposing implementation of an A-scheme and a B-scheme curriculum like the one found atLeeds (the “Two Little Schemes” that were the subject of the poem mentioned above). It would have been right around this period that Tolkienread his “Chaucer as Philologist” paper. He was by no means the first todraw Chaucer into the long-standing Lit. and Lang. debate, and he wascertainly not the last. In the opening, he suggests that Chaucer is not exactly rolling in his grave over the state of his legacy but rather, accordingto Tolkien:. . . surveying from the Galaxye our literary and philologicalantics upon the litel erthe that heer is . . . so ful of torment and ofharde grace . . . One can imagine the brief burning words,like those with which he scorched Adam [Scriveyn], that hewould address to those who profess to admire him while disdaining ‘philology.’ (109)Tolkien quotes lines from Chaucer’s earlier dream poem, XXXXXXXX Parliamentof Fowls (56-7; 65), where the narrator reads about Scipio, who dreamsthat his ancestor, Scipio Africanus, shows him the earth from the heavens.While Tolkien goes on to say that one may suspect that Chaucer “wouldprefer the Philological Society to the Royal Society of Literature, and aneditor[ship] of the English Dictionary, to a poet laureate” (1), he neveronce asserts that literary study is pointless. Rather, he argues that Chaucer was apparently intrigued by speech patterns and dialectal variety.45A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.Tolkien asserts that the Reeve’s Tale is an extended dialectal joke.6 Sincehis paper was meant for oral delivery, the idea was that all the philologistsin the room could have a laugh at the expense of the literature crowd (ifindeed any were present). Tolkien insists that dialects are not only funnybut, in this instance, vital to analysis. Furthermore, he suggests that whileLondon was the locus of polite language, the really interesting places tohear people speak in the Middle Ages would have been out in the country, particularly in college towns (4). Tolkien also informs his audiencethat he is about to play professor, and read the Reeve’s Tale as though hewere to “put Chaucer through a linguistic examination” (11).Tolkien surmises that the distinct features of the clerks’ accents canbe found in Scandinavian and Northern influences, and that geographical analysis offers further clues about where their dialects originate. XXXXXXXXReeve states that the clerks come from Strother, a place name that meanssimply “marsh,” as if to say the clerks come from a town called Swamp.7As elements in place names, -strother and -strothe were once associated withtowns in Lancashire, the Lake counties, and Northumberland, some ofwhich are now lost, such as Caldstrother and Langstrothdale (58). Since noactual place by the name of Strother alone seems to have existed for theclerks to hail from, the word could also be a clue indicating their ancestry. XXXXXXXX MED lists the names le Strodere and Strother, and Tolkien pointsout that the surname, de Strother, belonged to a considerably importantfamily from Northumberland during the late fourteenth-century (56-8).Although in regards to Strother, the Reeve says he “kan nat telle where”(4015), Chaucer, at least, demonstrates a keen sense of terms, places, andfamilial names particular to the remote North.8In the Reeve’s Tale, the Cambridge students, John and Aleyn, are sentby their manciple to Trumpington to collect grain from the miller, Symkyn. Believing that the miller is a swindler, John and Aleyn devise a planto outsmart him and steal extra grain and flour. XXXXXXXX miller senses theirdeviousness and retaliates by untying their horse, which they are forced tochase until the end of the day. During the chase scene, John and Aleyn’shabits of speech are further revealed. Tolkien evaluates Chaucer’s application of the ä/ô “sound-law” to point out the Northernisms. John andAleyn’s vowels show a clear retention of ä:164 (4084) “Alas,” quod Iohn, “Alain for cristës paine,Lai doun þi swerd, and I sal min alswa.I es ful wight, god wat, as es a ra.Bi goddës hertẹ, he sal nought scape vs baþe !Qui nad þou pit þe capel i þe laþe ?169 (4089) Il hail ! Bi god, Alain, þou es a fonne. (my emphasis)46Jill FitzgeraldBecause of this sound change, pronunciations like bǫǫn (“bone”), and later bōn, developed in the South, whereas bān remained in the North. Tolkien remarks that “the most striking characteristic of Northern speech ina London ear was the long ā (of O.E. or O.N. origin)” (114). He praisesChaucer’s representation of northern ā, and his equally consistent usageof the sound represented by “hooked o” which, he argues, a Southernaudience would have regarded as “normal usage” (114).Tolkien next launches into an exhaustive catalogue of the Northernisms in the clerks’ ninety-eight speaking lines of the fabliau. He pointsout that John says of the manciple “Swa werkës ai þe wangës in his hed(line 4030) [the molars?/temples? in his head ache so [much]], and notesthat previous commentators gloss wanges as “molars.” Still, outside thispassage the sense “molar” is always expressed wong-tothe (cheek- or jawtooth; see MED wong n.2 def. b.). By itself, wong from OE wange usuallymeans “cheek.” Tolkien cites the phrase wete wonges, a sign of weepingcommonly found in alliterative poetry. 9 XXXXXXXX ON cognate vangi, however,meant not the cheek but “the whole side of the head” (Cleasby and Vigfusson), so that wong in John’s Scandinavian-influenced Northern dialectmight mean not “molar” or “cheek” but rather “temple.” Tolkien’s assessment of the variant meaning of the word suggests that the manciple’smalady may be a migraine, and not a toothache, and implies Chaucer’sfamiliarity with differences in Northern semantics (37-40). Moreover, byemphasizing a word with non-normal or imperceptible usage, Chauceronly adds to the joke.Tolkien goes on to record certain words in the appendices that havevery few southerly attestations: gif, sal, boes, tan, ymel, and slik (for “such”).Overall, Tolkien identifies 127 points of morphology (inflection), phonology, and vocabulary all to be regarded as distinctly variant fromSouthern linguistic patterns. Finally, taking on the role of philologicalexaminer, Tolkien asserts that he “would award Chaucer a fairly highmark for his effort” (16).Of course, Tolkien admits, the MSS. of the Canterbury Tales exhibita great degree of dialectal and orthographic variation.10 He addressesthis obvious problem by suggesting that Chaucer’s subtle dialectal detailsmay have even been omitted by scribes who were not able to recognizethem, or did not fully get the “joke” (12). S.C.P. Horobin has pointed outin his “Reconsideration of the Northernisms in Chaucer’s Reeve’s Tale”(2001) that Tolkien leaned heavily on the Ellesmere MS for his study andthat, since his lecture, most critics have come to regard Hengwrt as theMS from which most of the others derive or “mirror” (100). Horobinargues that in Hengwrt the students’ Northernisms are inconsistentlyrepresented in terms of grammar and morphology (99). Furthermore,47A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.he asserts that only two MSS (Cambridge Dd and BL Harley) show evidence of scribes augmenting the Northernisms, while the rest (not fullyunderstanding the joke) make Southern substitutions.11 Horobin concurswith N. F. Blake that Chaucer’s main intent was to express a “flavour” ofNorthern dialect “rather than [achieve] absolute philological accuracy orconsistency.” He goes on to say that “Chaucer’s representation of dialectwas no doubt further constrained by the nature of his Southern, courtlyaudience, who would perhaps have had difficulties comprehending themore extreme provincialisms of Northern speech” (104).Horobin’s analysis may indeed cast doubt on Tolkien’s argument ifone accepts, as many (but by no means all) contemporary critics have,that Hengwrt is a more definitive text. Nevertheless, Tolkien’s criticalwork is valuable on several planes. On one level, his criticism frequentlyshows a unique scholarly acumen, an ability to look in on the field anddispel persistent misconceptions. While Tolkien’s body of scholarship issometimes thought to be relatively small, much of the criticism he left usshows distinguishing impulses that defend and reinforce both his professional and creative efforts.One often senses that Tolkien used his scholarship as a defense of hisown literary work: “I have the author of Beowulf, at any rate, on my side:a greater man than most of us. And I cannot myself perceive a periodin the North when one kind alone was esteemed: there was room formyth and heroic legend, and for blends of all these” (MC 16). Tolkien’s“Chaucer as a Philologist” lecture took place five years before “Beowulf:the Monsters and the Critics.” XXXXXXXX latter was published the same yearas XXXXXXXX Hobbit, in 1937 (Carpenter 269). XXXXXXXXre is a little self-advocacy inboth these essays. In other words, Tolkien justifies his avocation as a fantasywriter in “Beowulf: XXXXXXXX Monsters and the Critics” and defends his occupation as philologist in “Chaucer as a Philologist.”Despite Tolkien’s role in the Lit. and Lang. dispute he had plenty offriends on both sides of the aisle. By 1931, he continued to work diligently with C. S. Lewis among others to remake the curriculum. Still, thereis no denying that his professorship was filled with immense anguish overthe state of his beloved subject. Shippey comments on the end result ofthe post-philological era:In this entire process the thing which was perhaps erodedmost of all was the philologists’ sense of a line between imagination and reality. XXXXXXXX whole of their science conditionedthem to the acceptance of what one might call ‘*-’ or ‘asterisk-reality,’ that which no longer existed but could with 100per cent certainty be inferred. (Road 22)XXXXXXXX concept of an “asterisk reconstruction” is not unique to Tolkien,48Jill Fitzgeraldbut a creative exploit we know he dabbled in a great deal. Asterisk reconstructions involved discerning words and even whole works that musthave existed once, and reintroducing them as though they had alwaysbeen there. Tolkien also wrote pastiches, or “asterisk poems” in ancientlanguages.12 Many medieval scholars undertook this practice with greatseriousness and, for some, reconstruction was more than just a popularform of imitation. XXXXXXXX Danish scholar and poet, Alex Olrik, re-composed the Old Norse poem, the Bjarkamál, from an Icelandic fragmentand Latin paraphrase.13 For Olrik, the goal was that a fragment could“gradually come to life,” and in his Introduction to Heroic Legends of Denmark (1919) he encourages his audience to “live [themselves] into theBjarkamál’s world of thought” (86).In the case of Tolkien, his pastiches (like his scholarship) seem tied tohis frustration with university bureaucracy. One Middle English pastiche,called “XXXXXXXX Clerkes Compleinte,” conveys his early sense of frustrationjust two years after he began as a Reader at Leeds. This sixty-line poemwas anonymously published in XXXXXXXX Gryphon (1922), a student and facultyperiodical at what was then “Yorkshire College.” In the poem, the narrator, a young “clerke” is discouraged from registering for the languagecourses he wishes to take in the fall. During the academic year of 1921-1922, Tolkien’s teaching responsibilities included History of the EnglishLanguage, West Saxon Texts, the Language of Chaucer, and Old andMiddle English Dialects (Scull Companion 117). One can imagine thatthese courses provided him with plenty of linguistic materials to includein this poem. XXXXXXXX phonetics, lexis, syntax, and scansion of the MiddleEnglish are all very accurate. It is no surprise that Tolkien was also putting the final touches on A Middle English Vocabulary three or four monthsbefore the poem was published (Scull Companion 119).Long before his application and appointment at Oxford, Tolkienshows a morose sense of the dwindling status of language study. XXXXXXXX Gryphon14 issue containing “XXXXXXXX Clerkes Compleinte” was rediscovered in1984 by Anders Stenström, and the poem, edited by T. A. Shippey andStenström, was subsequently published in the Swedish journal Arda thatsame year.15 Shortly after the poem was published, Christopher Tolkien provided Stenström with a facsimile of a handwritten manuscriptof “XXXXXXXX Clerkes Compleinte” (fol.1r – fol. 2r) which his father had revised later on in his career, probably when he was at Oxford. According to Christopher Tolkien, this copy was written no earlier than 1924on paper used in Oxford examinations.16 Several emendations had beenmade since the original version. “Leedes,” instead of being described asthe “fairest” town in Yorkshire, became the “derkest.” Instead of Leedsbeing the university where the group of young clerks journey to for registration, and from whence narrator is banished, Tolkien emends it to49A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.“Oxenforde” in the marginalia (line 16).To my knowledge “XXXXXXXX Clerkes Compleinte” has not come up inTolkien studies outside of Shippey’s and Stenström’s commentary in Arda,under Shippey’s entry for “Poetry in Other Languages” in the Tolkien Encyclopedia, and an annotation in Scull and Hammond’s Tolkien Companionand Guide (2006). This poem is one of two known and complete samplesof Tolkien writing in a Middle English dialect. XXXXXXXX other such poemis called “Doworst,” and is also about struggling university students.“Doworst” is in the alliterative style and meter of William Langland’sPiers Plowman but, unlike “XXXXXXXX Clerkes Compleinte,” the narrator’s Visiodescribes Oxford students performing miserably during their oral examinations while their professors, “four clerks” who are difficult to please,administer the questions.17Readers familiar with Chaucer find themselves on familiar linguisticground from the start of “XXXXXXXX Clerkes Compleinte,” but will quicklyrealize that the mood which Tolkien establishes is starkly different fromthat of Chaucer’s opening to XXXXXXXX Canterbury Tales. Stenström’s follow-uparticle in 1986 outlined the multiple variations between the version inXXXXXXXX Gryphon, a typescript, and the Oxford version, and included severalemendations to the Arda 1984 edition. Since copies of Arda are not widelyavailable, and the revised Oxford version has not been transcribed fromthe facsimile published in Arda in 1986, I submit the Oxford version ofthe poem in its entirety:Þe Clerkes CompleinteWhanne þat Octobre mid his schoures derkeÞe erþe haþ dreint, and wetė windes cherke& swoghe in naked braunches colde and bare,& þ’oldė sonne is hennes longe yfare; 5Whan misti cloudes blake ymeind with smokeher yen blenden & her þrotes choke,& frosty Eurus with his kenė teþEch man forwelked biteþ þat him fleþ,& wrecchė cattes youlen umbewhiles,þat slepen nat, bot wandren on þe tiles 10(So prikeþ hem nature in her corages)—Þan þinken folk to doon her auantages,& seken hem faire educaciounIn yonge dayes of þe sessioun;& specially from euery schires ende 15In al þe north to Leedės clerkes wende, [marginal note: “londe toOxenforde þei wende”]& in þe derkest toune of Yorkeschire50Jill FitzgeraldSeken of lore welles depe and schire!Bifel þat in þat sesoun dim & mat,In Leedes atte dores as I sat, 20At morne was come in to þo halles hyeWel nygh fyue hondred in my companyeof newė clerkes in an egre presse,langages olde þat wolden lerne, I gesse,Of Fraunce or Engelonde or Spayne or Ruce, 25þo tonges harde of Hygh Almayne & Pruce;Or historye, or termes queinte of lawe—yit nas bot litel Latin in her mawe,& bolde men, alas, þer were yet leceþat þoghten wrestle with þe tonge of Grece, 30or doon her hedes aken with etyk& with philosophye malencolyk.And yit an heep was þer so huge yþronge,vnnethe mighte I tellen tho clerkes yongeþat wolde lerne how men in Fattes depe 35With queynte odoures hydes seþe and stepe,or weuen wolle in webbes softe & fayre,or brennen col & fylen nat þe ayre!Þer soghte an huge prees matematyk& fragraunt chymistrie & sleigh physyk, 40& mani uncouþ sciencė for þe nonesof floures, fissches, or of oldė stones.Þer mani vois gan maken swich a dinþe heuy ayres schooke, & many a pinvnherd þer fil vpon þo flores wyde, 45til þat men criden hy myn ere bisideof fees & of examinacioun,& axede of matriculacioun,& wher I hadde of Godes faire graceby auenture ychaunced hit to pace. 50Þogh maystres hadde I mo þan þryės ten,& wysdom of an heep of lerned men,þat were of lore expert & curious,yit couthe I nat namore þan can a mousof swich lettrure, ne wiste I what þey mente. 55Lo! fro þe halles swiþe men me senteto dwellen al a yeer withoute yate& pleynen me of myne unkyndė fate,51A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.withoute yates al a yeer to dwellene durrė drynken of þe clerė welle! 60N. N. 18XXXXXXXX opening lines obviously evoke an array of Chaucerian allusions,but they do so through inversion. XXXXXXXX freshness and vitality of springtime which Chaucer conjures in the General Prologue of the CanterburyTales (1-27) is replaced by the chill of fall. Chaucer’s April is swapped forOctober; Zephyrus becomes frosty Eurus who, instead of loosing sweetbreath, chokes the throat. XXXXXXXX sounds of birds tweeting are replaced bycats caterwauling, and the narrator finds himself not at the Tabard Inn,but at the door to Leeds University at registration time. Several lines inXXXXXXXX Clerkes Compleinte are the same as ones found in the General Prologue:Line 11: “(So priketh hem nature in her corages)”; line 15: “And speciallyfrom every schires ende.” Line 28 closely resembles the final line of theEpilogue to the Man of Law’s Tale: “XXXXXXXXr is but litel Latyn in my mawe”(1190). Line 575 of the General Prologue, which refers to the Manciple,reads, “XXXXXXXX wisdom of an heep of lerned men”; it is echoed in line 52of XXXXXXXX Clerkes Compleinte. Among the list of languages from distant landsmentioned by the clerk, Pruce and Ruce compare to the list of placeswhere the Knight has fought as mentioned in the General Prologue (53-4).Tolkien has inserted several modernisms in Middle English form such as“matriculacioun,” and “examinacioun” (lines 47-8).While Tolkien uses the language of innuendo and polite confrontation in his address to the Philological Society, I believe that “XXXXXXXX ClerkesCompleinte” registers his more private tone on the matter of philology:a deeply personal sense of marginalization and a sense of professionallament that is also present in works like “Leaf by Niggle” and Smith ofWootton Major. XXXXXXXXse autobiographical allegories register a sense of personal failure, of efforts gone under-appreciated, similar to the tone in thiscomplaint. XXXXXXXX clerk-narrator is timid and hesitant about his interest inlanguages, until he is finally frightened away from pursuing them in hisstudies. XXXXXXXX din of those registering for vocational studies such as physics, chemistry, and engineering is overwhelming to him and, in the end,the clerk is ushered out of the hall and left to lament his fate for a year.It is appropriate that Tolkien brought up Chaucer again and againto emphasize his thoughts about Lit. and Lang. since Chaucer’s workswere commonly regarded as a dividing line, the place where philologists and medievalists were reputed to end their literary pursuits, andwhere modernists would not venture further into the past. XXXXXXXX Lit. andLang. debate has not really gone away, but been redefined in ways thatTolkien probably never would have predicted. XXXXXXXX Oxford curriculumunderwent further changes in 2001 when compulsory Old English was52Jill Fitzgeraldremoved. However, a compulsory History of the English Language paper (now known as XXXXXXXX English Language) with an emphasis on sociolinguists and linguistic theory remains.19 It would be interesting to knowwhere Tolkien would stand on current scholarly debates involving theoryand literature, or literature and composition. Yet, I think it is safe to say,no matter what the state of literature and language studies, he wouldhave looked for common ground with his students and colleagues.NOTESI am grateful to Professor Paul Acker for his editorial guidance withthis paper, S. Gary Hunnewell for providing me with a copy of Arda,and Professor Thomas A. Shippey for his advice and many helpful comments.1 XXXXXXXX actual date of the paper’s delivery was May 16, 1931. Withthe assistance of David Nichol Smith, Tolkien was putting the finaltouches on the paper for publication in December 1932. At aboutthe same time, somewhere between the end of 1932 and the start ofthe New Year, Tolkien gave the first typescript of XXXXXXXX Hobbit to C. S.Lewis (Scull Chronology 166-7). At the time of the lecture’s publicationin 1934, Tolkien stated that he had intended a “closer investigationof words, and more still a much fuller array of readings from MSS.of the Reeve’s Tale . . . But for neither have I had opportunity, and dusthas merely accumulated on the pages.” Tolkien did include textualnotes and appendices, nearly thirty pages worth, that were “naturallyomitted in reading.” Along with the reprint of “Chaucer as a Philologist,” Tolkien Studies 5 included the reproduction of a pamphletincluding Tolkien’s prefatory remarks on “XXXXXXXX Reeve’s Tale” (1939),which he prepared for the Oxford “Summer Diversions” (173-83).2 J. M. Kemble’s attempt to introduce philology and Grimmian scholarship to Oxford and Cambridge during the 1830s was unpopular(partly arising from Kemble’s cantankerousness). For informationabout Kemble’s professional career, see Dickins. For correspondencebetween Kemble and Jakob Grimm, see Shippey & Haarder.3 For analysis and translations of primary sources on nineteenth-century critical scholarship about Beowulf, see Shippey & Haarder.4 By the time Tolkien left Leeds, literature students still outnumberedlanguage students by a ratio of about 2:1 (Letters 12-13).5 XXXXXXXX poem dedicated to Auden was an imitation of the OE poem,XXXXXXXX Gifts of Men; see Encyclopedia “Poems by Tolkien in Other Languages,” 514.53A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.6 Benson cites Tolkien as the first modern critic to examine the dialectsin XXXXXXXX Reeve’s Tale (see Riverside explanatory note, 4022). For furthercritical studies on dialects and XXXXXXXX Reeve’s Tale, see Horobin, Smith,and Meier.7 I owe this suggestion to Professor Paul Acker. For a further explanation of strothe, see MED and E. V. Gordon’s edition of Pearl (1953).Gordon notes that the Gawain-poet uses the word strothe in Sir Gawain(line 1710) to describe the fox’s hiding place, and stroþe-men in Pearl(line 115) to mean “men of this world” also carrying “pictorially,a suggestion of the dark, low earth onto which the high stars lookdown” (note 115).8 XXXXXXXX clerks also swear by Seint Cutberd [St. Cuthbert] (4127), who wascommonly associated with the North, especially the county of Durham.9 XXXXXXXX formula my wonges waxeþ won (or wete) is commonly found in Northern alliterative works, notably in Harley 2253 (from this MS, Tolkienpoints to the lyric, Alysoun); the other texts he points to are CursorMundi, the York Plays, Joseph of Arimathie, Sir Tristrem, Layamon’s Brut,and the Promptorium Parvulorum. XXXXXXXX line also appears in two otheralliterative poems from Harley 2253 that Tolkien does not mention:XXXXXXXX Poet’s Repentance: “Weping haueth myn wonges wet” (line 1), andAn Old Man’s Prayer: “Unwunne haueth myn wonges wet” (line 13).See Kurath MED wong n.(2), def. (a) for further examples.10 Tolkien adds that “for lack of time and opportunity [this study]is based solely on the facsimile of the Ellesmere MS.; and on theSix-Text (Hengwrt (H), Cambridge University Library Gg.4.27 (C),Corpus Christi College, Oxford (O), Petworth (P), Landsdown 851(L)) and the Harleian MS. 7334 (Hl) printed by the Chaucer Society(11). Furthermore he writes that “the copyists must, of course, usually have perceived that the clerks’ lines were abnormal in language”(13).11 Some of the terms he points to as having Norse roots and being replaced by Southern equivalents are: heythen, ille (from ON illr) (103).For further information on the Hengwrt MS, see Horobin.12 Songs for the Philologists also included four “asterisk” poems: one inGothic “Bagme Bloma,” and three in Old English in ballad style(“Éadig Béo Þu,” “Ides Ælfscýne,” and “Ofer Wídne Garsecg”). Fortexts and translations, see Shippey, Road 353-61.13 XXXXXXXX Bjarkamál was an incitement to battle recited to the troops of54Jill FitzgeraldKing Óláfr before the Battle of Stiklastaðir (in 1030).14 XXXXXXXX Gryphon first appeared in 1897 and, though it was disbanded inthe 1960s, still holds the title of longest-running staff and studentperiodical at Leeds. For information on the centenary celebration ofthe journal held in 1997, see the online Leeds University ArchivesExhibition page under “Centenary of XXXXXXXX Gryphon.”15 Arda is only kept in five libraries worldwide. In the United States, itcan be found at Harvard University, Bowling Green State University,and Marquette University.16 For a facsimile reproduction of this page and analysis of the threeversions of the poem (one of which is a typescript emended in bothpencil and ink), see Anders Stenström’s “XXXXXXXX Clerkes CompleinteRevisited” in Arda 1986, pp. 1-13. XXXXXXXXre are four notes made byTolkien in the margins of the facsimile: line 17: londe to Oxenforde þeiwend[e]; line 23: Students are enrolled; line 41: large queue for ‘applied science’;line 46: female students scatter hairpins (now obsolete).17 Tolkien initially gave the manuscript of “Doworst” to R. W. Chambers. Eventually it passed to Arthur Brown. In 1978, the first nineteenlines of the poem were printed in a fanzine by a group from MonashUniversity, Victoria, Australia. According to Anderson “the locationof this manuscript . . . since Brown’s death in 1979 is unknown” (144n.6). Scull and Hammond note that a revised copy was given by Tolkien to his colleague Kathleen Lea in 1953, but they do not mentionwhether or not the location of this copy is known (214).18 “N.N.” is the signature following XXXXXXXX Gryphon version of the text.Shippey suggests that “N.N.” stands for “No Name.” Alternatively,the abbreviation might stand for “Nomen Nescio,” a Latin abbreviation used to specify persons unknown or anonymous which literallymeans “I do not know the name.”19 I would to thank Professor Carolyne Larrington of St. John’s College,Oxford for her personal correspondence regarding the current stateof the Oxford curriculum.55A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.WORKS CITEDAnderson, Douglas A. “R. W. Chambers and XXXXXXXX Hobbit.” Tolkien Studies3 (2006): 137-47.Brook, G. L., ed. XXXXXXXX Harley Lyrics: XXXXXXXX Middle English Lyrics of MS. Harley2253. Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1964.Carpenter, Humphrey. J.R.R. Tolkien: A Biography. London: Harper Collins, 1995.“Centenary of XXXXXXXX Gryphon.” Leeds University Archives Exhibitions. 26 April2005. <http://www.leeds.ac.uk/library/spcoll/archive/gryphon.htm> (27 September 2008).Chambers, R. W. “Philology: General Works.” XXXXXXXX Year’s Work in EnglishStudies 4 (1923): 20-37.Chaucer, Geoffrey. “General Prologue.” XXXXXXXX Riverside Chaucer. Ed. LarryD. Benson. Third ed., Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988.23-36.———. “XXXXXXXX Parliament of Fowls.” XXXXXXXX Riverside Chaucer. Ed. Larry D.Benson. Third ed., Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988.385-94.———. “XXXXXXXX Reeve’s Tale.” XXXXXXXX Riverside Chaucer. Ed. Larry D. Benson.Third ed., Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988. 78-84.Cleasby, Richard and Gudbrand Vigfusson. An Icelandic—English Dictionary. 2nd ed. with supplement by William A. Craigie. Oxford:Clarendon Press, 1957.Dickins, Bruce. J. M. Kemble and Old English Scholarship. London: Humphrey Milford, 1940.Gordon, E. V., ed. Pearl. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1953.Horobin, S. C. P. “J.R.R. Tolkien as a Philologist: A Reconsideration ofthe Northernisms in Chaucer’s Reeve’s Tale.” English Studies: AJournal of English Language and Literature 82.2 (2001): 97-105.———. “Chaucer’s Norfolk Reeve.” Neophilologus 86.4 (2002): 609-12.Kurath, Hans, et al., eds. Middle English Dictionary. Ann Arbor: Universityof Michigan Press, 1952-2001.Meier, Hans H. “Past Presences of Older Scots Abroad.” Nuttis Schell:Essays on the Scots Language Presented to A. J. Aitken. Eds. Caroline56Jill FitzgeraldMacafee and Iseabail Macleod. Aberdeen: Aberdeen University Press, 1987: 116-123.N. N. [ J.R.R. Tolkien]. “XXXXXXXX Clerkes Compleinte.” XXXXXXXX Gryphon: XXXXXXXXJournal of the University of Leeds 4.3 (December 1922): 95.Olrik, Axel. “XXXXXXXX Biarkamal.” XXXXXXXX Heroic Legends of Denmark. Trans. LeeM. Hollander. New York: American-Scandinavian Foundation.1919. Millwood, N.Y.: Kraus Reprint, 1976: 90-8.Palmer, D. J. XXXXXXXX Rise of English Studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press,1965.Scase, Wendy. “Tolkien, Philology, and the Reeve’s Tale: Towards theCultural Move in Middle English Studies.” Studies in the Age ofChaucer: XXXXXXXX Yearbook of the New Chaucer Society. 24 (2002): 325-34.Scull, Christina and Wayne G. Hammond. XXXXXXXX J.R.R. Tolkien Companionand Guide: Chronology. Vol. 1. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006.———. XXXXXXXX J.R.R. Tolkien Companion and Guide: Reader’s Guide. Vol. 2. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006.Shippey, T. A. “Fighting the Long Defeat: Philology in Tolkien’s Lifeand Fiction.” Roots and Branches: Selected Papers on Tolkien by TomShippey. Zollikofen, Switzerland: Walking Tree, 2007: 139-56.———. “Poems by Tolkien in Other Languages.” In XXXXXXXX J.R.R. TolkienEncyclopedia: Scholarship and Critical Assessment. Ed. Michael D. C.Drout. New York: Routledge, 2006: 514-5.———. XXXXXXXX Road to Middle-earth: Revised and Expanded Edition. Boston:Houghton Mifflin, 2003.———, and Andreas Haarder, eds. Beowulf: XXXXXXXX Critical Heritage. NewYork: Routledge, 1998.———, and Anders Stenström. “XXXXXXXX Clerkes Compleinte: Text, Commentary and Translation.” Arda 4 (1984): 1-11.Smith, Jeremy J. “XXXXXXXX Great Vowel Shift in the North of England, andSome Forms in Chaucer’s Reeve’s Tale.” Neuphilologische Mitteilungen 95.4 (1994): 433-7.Stenström, Anders. “XXXXXXXX Clerkes Compleinte Revisited.” Arda 6 (1986): 1-13.Tolkien, J.R.R. “Chaucer as a Philologist: XXXXXXXX Reeve’s Tale.” Transactions57A “Clerkes Compleinte”: Tolkien and the Division of Lit. and Lang.of the Philological Society (1934): 1-70 [reprinted in Tolkien Studies5 (2008): 109-71].———. “XXXXXXXX Oxford English School.” XXXXXXXX Oxford Magazine (May 1930):778-82.———. “XXXXXXXX Reeve’s Tale.” Tolkien Studies 5 (2008): 173-83.———. “Leaf by Niggle.” Tree and Leaf. London: Unwin Books, 1964;Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1965. Expanded as Tree and Leaf,including the Poem Mythpoeia [and] XXXXXXXX Homecoming of BeorhtnothBeorhthelm’s Son. London: HarperCollins, 2001.——— , E. V. Gordon et. al. Songs for the Philologists. London: Departmentof English at University College, 1936.Utz, Richard. Chaucer and the Discourse of German Philology: A History of Reception and an Annotated Bibliography of Studies 1793-1948. Turnout:Brepols; Cheltenham: European Schoolbooks, 2002.59Copyright © West Virginia University PressEchoes of Pearl in Arda’s LandscapeSTEFAN EKMAN“It is made of tales often told before and elsewhere, and of elements that derive from remote times” (MC 72). This is how J.R.R. Tolkiendescribed the Middle English poem Sir Gawain and the Green Knight but itis a description which would fit much of Tolkien’s fiction equally well.XXXXXXXX world of Arda and the many stories set therein carry within themechoes of earlier tales, and even though it would be terribly reductive todiscuss Tolkien’s work only in terms of its sources, knowledge of wherethe echoes come from contributes to our understanding and, perhapsmore importantly, enjoyment of his world and stories. This is illustratedas much by the numerous university courses that discuss Tolkien and hisliterary roots as by the scholarship that examines Tolkien’s texts in termsof medieval language as well as literature. Indeed, many readers takegreat pleasure simply in identifying an echo from “remote times,” be ita connection between Merlin and Gandalf, the philological roots of thewoses in Sir Gawain’s wodwos, or similarities between the battles of Fingolfin and Morgoth in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, and Arthur and the giant in XXXXXXXX FaerieQueene. Many echoes are still left unexplored, however, and in this article,I will investigate what traces the Middle English poem Pearl may have leftin Tolkien’s creation and suggest how he made the landscape of Pearl hisown, writing it surely and truly into some of the more memorable partsof Arda.My point of departure is Tolkien’s poem “XXXXXXXX Nameless Land” inwhich he uses the Pearl meter and which recalls the strange and beautiful land where the Dreamer in Pearl finds himself. Apart from invokinga similar dreamlike landscape, the poem’s setting shares several distinctfeatures with the Dreamer’s surroundings, but it also shows distinct connections to the world of Arda, connections which become clearer as subsequent revisions of “XXXXXXXX Nameless Land” are taken into account. I thenexamine landscapes both in Aman and Middle-earth where echoes ofthe Pearl landscape can be found, discussing both physical appearanceand the associations among visions, dreams, and death which can befound in the medieval poem as well as in the garden of Lórien in theBlessed Realm and the Elvish realm of Lothlórien.* * *Ever since he first applied himself to the study of Middle English inhis teens, the two poems Pearl and Sir Gawain and the Green Knight exercisedenormous influence on Tolkien. Indeed, among his lasting academic60Stefan Ekmanachievements must be included his 1925 edition of Sir Gawain co-editedwith E. V. Gordon, and he worked, more or less actively, with editionsand translations of Pearl and Sir Gawain from 1922 to his death (Letters 11;Tolkien, Preface to Sir Gawain and the Green Knight 7). Tom Shippey suggeststhat it would be “characteristic of Tolkien to have read Pearl and startedthinking about it literally,” wondering, along with the Dreamer, whatplace this actually was (Shippey, personal communication). Not muchis told about the setting of the poem, but if Tolkien followed the samereading strategy for Pearl as he recommends for Sir Gawain (“close anddetailed attention, and after that . . . careful consideration” MC 72), hewould discover a very vivid landscape.XXXXXXXX main description of the Pearl landscape is found in stanzas 6-11. Set at the foot of mountains and beneath crystal cliffs, a wondroustract of woodland stretches down to a river, across which the Dreamerconverses with the Pearl Maiden. In this forest, the trees have indigoblue trunks and leaves of burnished silver (Gordon ll. 76-77). Amongtheir boughs there are fragrant fruits and birds of splendid colours andbeautiful voices (ll. 87-94). XXXXXXXX gravel underfoot is precious pearls (ll.81-82), stream banks glow like golden thread, and he walks through alandscape of “raweƷ and randeƷ and rych reuereƷ” (l. 105), that is, according to Gordon’s notes, hedge- or tree rows (raweƷ), strips of land beside a stream or other body of water (randeƷ), and either meadows alongstreams or the streams themselves (reuereƷ) (Gordon 50). Through theelaborate concatenation used in Pearl, the five-stanza sections are unitedthrough key words or expressions which come to characterise each section. In stanzas 6-10, the word which thus characterises the landscape is“adubbement”, a word which means adornment or splendour according toGordon’s glossary, and which Tolkien translates as wonderment. Wandering through this land of wonder, the dreaming protagonist eventuallyreaches a river with banks of beryl (l. 110) and a riverbed of preciousstones (ll. 117-18). XXXXXXXXre is, however, an intriguing problem of geography here, as Tom Shippey observes:All readers realize that the river which the dreamer cannotcross is the river of death. But in that case, where is he standing? It is not Paradise, for that is on the other side of the river;but it is not Middle-earth either . . . . (Author 197, his emphasis; cf. Road 181)Tolkien also appears to have given some thought to the strange landin Pearl. In May 1924, he wrote a 60-line poem using the complex Pearlstanza, to show that its metrical form was possible to render in modern English (Letters 317). XXXXXXXX poem is called “XXXXXXXX Nameless Land,” anda version of it was published in 1927 in Realities: An Anthology of Verse61Echoes of Pearl in Arda’s Landscape(reprinted in XXXXXXXX Lost Road). Shippey suggests that the poem recalls thestrange, nameless land in Pearl (Road 181), and although Tolkien does nottie his stanzas together in the same way that the Pearl poet does, there isno denying the sense of wonderment that pervades “XXXXXXXX Nameless Land.”Tolkien’s poems also share more specific features with Pearl: not only isit suggested that it is a dream (l. 56), but there are trees with silver leaves(ll. 3-4), wonderful fragrance (l. 16), and shining beaches beneath crystalcliffs (ll. 35-36). XXXXXXXXre is even water impossible to cross. In Pearl, the riverof death separates the Dreamer from the Pearl Maiden and Paradise;in “XXXXXXXX Nameless Land,” a stream flows towards the sea which “no saildoth know” (l. 20), a “water wide” which “no feet may tame” (l. 31).Indeed, the river of death is also a water that “no feet may tame”—atleast not in life (ll. 318-24). XXXXXXXX water is too deep for the Dreamer todare wade across, and he is unable to find a ford (ll. 143, 150); and whenhe attempts to throw himself into the river and swim to Paradise, he iswhisked back to the waking world (ll.1l57-71).It is hardly surprising that there are similarities between the mysterious land in Pearl and the Nameless Land described in a poem which was“inspired by reading Pearl for examination purposes” (Lost Road 98). Butare they the same place? XXXXXXXXre is no explanation of what land Tolkien iswriting about, but it mentions a few places which it is not. It is obviouslynot Middle-earth, the land of the living—even time behaves differentlyin the Nameless Land: the “endless year” neither “fades nor falls,” theafternoon is “ageless,” and evening never comes (ll. 6-9)—but it is also“more faint and far” than Paradise, and “more fair and free” than thefaerie realm of Tir-nan-Og (ll. 49-50). XXXXXXXX inhabitants described brieflyin stanza 4 are equally elusive. Lovely, certainly, and barefoot, dressed inwind and rain (ll. 37-44) but apart from that, unknown—and unknowable—to the reader.At this point, it is tempting to assume that “XXXXXXXX Nameless Land”describes a dreamland similar to that in Pearl, but the final stanza complicates such an assumption. Although the land described in the poemmight be nameless, two places connected to it are named. In line 51,there is an invocation of the “shore beyond the Shadowy Sea” and inthe same stanza are mentioned the “beacon towers in Gondobar” (l. 57).Christopher Tolkien, in his comment to the poem, observes that Gondobar is also mentioned in a later (c. 1940) version of Tolkien’s earlypoem “XXXXXXXX Happy Mariners” but that elsewhere, it is one of the sevennames of Gondolin (Lost Road 104; cf. Lost Tales II 160). In fact, the nameGondobar appears already in “XXXXXXXX Fall of Gondolin,” one of the earliest texts about Arda, dating back to 1917 (Carpenter 92; Letters 345). XXXXXXXXShadowy Sea is similarly connected to Tolkien’s early writing. In LostTales I, it is the name of the sea between the Great Lands (which later62Stefan Ekmanturned into Middle-earth) and the Blessed Realm (Lost Tales I 68, 135 etpassim).XXXXXXXX connection between the Nameless Land and Tolkien’s earlierwork on the Silmarillion becomes even stronger when revisions of “XXXXXXXXNameless Land” are taken into account. Two of at least six later reworkings are included in Lost Road: the “Intermediate” and final versions according to Christopher Tolkien (the former version, he guesses, belongsto the time of XXXXXXXX Lost Road, early or mid-1930s, and the latter probablystems from the years after XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings but possibly as early as1945) (Lost Road 100, 8). While some lines survive unaltered from “XXXXXXXXNameless Land” to the poem’s final version, a great number of revisionsare made, setting the poem more and more firmly in Arda. While it isbeyond the scope of this article to discuss every revision, some of themmerit a closer look.In the intermediate version (“XXXXXXXX Song of Ælfwine” Lost Road 100-102) references to Tir-nan-Og and Paradise are removed, together withthe names Bran and Brendan (l. 45), and in line 50 the word “Edhil” isintroduced, which is glossed as a Sindarin word for “elves” in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion (S 358). Another addition is the phrase “west of West,” which is usedalready in the pre-Lord of the Rings version of the Silmarillion to describethe side of the Blessed Realm furthest away from the mortal lands; thisexpression is kept in the published version (Lost Road 206; S 28). In thefinal version an invocation of Eressëa, the Lonely Isle off the coast of Elvenhome, is added between the title and the first stanza, and “dreamingniphredil” is substituted for the “immortal dew” in line 15 (Lost Road 102).“Niphredil” is the white flower that greets Lúthien’s birth in Doriath andwhich also grows on Cerin Amroth in Lothlórien (S 344, 91; FR, II, vi,341f). Also, the “lingering lights” of line 1 are changed to “elven-lights.”By removing what to most readers would be familiar references (one ofthem actually precluding the possibility that the Nameless Land wouldbe Faerie, or Tir-nan-Og) and adding references to Arda, including moreelven names, the land (which ceases to be nameless; it has in the intermediate version a long-forgotten name and in the final version, a name unknown only by mortals (l. 27) clearly becomes Aman. This becomes evenmore obvious through the radical, and quite revealing, change to the titleof the later versions. XXXXXXXXy are called virtually the same thing, “XXXXXXXX Songof Ælfwine (on seeing the uprising of Eärendel),” with the difference thatthe later version lacks the brackets around the subtitle.Eärendel, an adaptation of what is probably an Old English name forthe morning star (Letters 385), is an important actor in Arda’s history. XXXXXXXX“wandering fire” that ties together stanzas 1, 2, and 3 in the poem (lines12-13 and 24-25 in all three versions) is the mariner Eärendel who sailsacross the sky with a silmaril on his brow and his ship filled with divine63Echoes of Pearl in Arda’s Landscapeflame (Lost Road 327; S 250). Ælfwine is a later name for Eriol (Lost Tales I15), a character of central importance in earlier versions of Tolkien’s legendarium. His story is described by Christopher Tolkien as “among theknottiest and most obscure matters in the whole history of Middle-earthand Aman” (Lost Tales I 13) and the addition of his name to the title ofthe poem is part of what Verlyn Flieger interprets as a development towards an increasing focus on a specific character (Flieger 72). XXXXXXXX name“Eriol” hints at another, if somewhat weaker, echo of Pearl as his namemeans “One who dreams alone” (Lost Tales I 2).XXXXXXXX names Ælfwine, Eärendel, Gondobar, Eressëa, and the ShadowySea all go back to writings about Arda’s First Age that predate “XXXXXXXXNameless Land.” Even in these early stories, some of them written asearly as 1916-17 (Lost Tales I 1) and all of them written before Pearl inspired the writing of “XXXXXXXX Nameless Land,” the Blessed Realm is described in terms similar to the Pearl landscape. When he wrote them,Tolkien was already familiar with the Middle English poem. During hisfirst explorations of Middle English in school, he read Pearl and it impressed him sufficiently to recite from it (and Beowulf and Sir Gawain andthe Green Knight) to a group of school friends in the early 1910s (Carpenter35, 46). Thus, the echoes of Pearl in Aman originate in Tolkien’s earlierencounters with the poem, although they might have been amplified by“XXXXXXXX Nameless Land.”To begin with, there is a superficial similarity between the landscapein Pearl and various places in Aman. In the wondrous Pearl forest, thegravel is pearls (ll. 81-82), the river has banks of beryl, and the pebblestherein are, in Tolkien’s translation, “emerald, sapphire, or jewel bright”(ll. 110, 118). In Lost Tales I, it is described how the Solosimpi bring uppearls from the sea-beds, how the Noldoli create the gems (Lost Tales I137-39), and how the Elvish cities and lands are adorned with thesepearls and gems. XXXXXXXXre is a clear connection between gems and water,where “pebbles of diamond and of crystal [were] cast in prodigalityabout the margin of the seas” and “the pools amid the dark rocks werefilled with jewels, and the Solosimpi whose robes were sewn with pearlsdanced about them” (Lost Tales I 139). In XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, the coast isclearly recognisable in this description of the dwelling-place of the Teleri(formerly Solosimpi) elves:Many jewels the Noldor gave them, opals and diamonds andpale crystals, which they strewed upon the shores and scattered in the pools; marvellous were the beaches of Elendë inthose days. And many pearls they won for themselves fromthe sea, and their halls were of pearl, and of pearl were themansions of Olwë at Aqualondë . . . . (S 61)64Stefan EkmanBilbo describes the coast of Aman in similar terms in the “Song ofEärendil” that he sings in Rivendell. Eärendil the Mariner journeys “until he heard on strands of pearl / where ends the world the music long, /where ever-foaming billows roll / the yellow gold and jewels wan” (FR,II, i, 228).XXXXXXXX clearest echo, however, is found elsewhere in the Blessed Realm.XXXXXXXX dream-land to which the Pearl Dreamer comes to receive a visionborders on the river of death across which lies Paradise. In Aman, asimilar place can be found in the gardens that in its Lost Tales version iscalled Murmuran. It is the dwelling of the Vala of dreams and visions,Lórien Olofántur. Beyond its boundaries lies the paradisal Valinor, andalthough this realm is situated at almost the opposite end of Valinor tothe dwelling of the Vala of death, Véfantur Mandos, dream and deathare close in a different way: Lórien and Mandos are brothers (Lost TalesI 66, 75, 77). XXXXXXXX names of the Vala of Dream and his realm have beenconstructed to underline Lórien’s function, as can be observed in the appendix to Lost Tales I. Murmuran has an unclear meaning, but contains theword stem MURU which is connected to sleep/slumber and is probablyrelated to maur “dream, vision”. Another stem associated to dreams andsleep, LORO, is found in both Lórien and Olofántur (and, in fact, Eriol), andin the latter name, the stem FANA can also be found, carrying meaningsof visions, dreams, and sleep.Murmuran and the Pearl landscape have other features in commonas well. Both places are located by mountains (Pearl, ll. 66, 74; Lost Tales I75) where birds sing beautifully (Pearl, l. 94; Lost Tales I 75). Although theylargely have different trees—Lórien’s gardens have mainly coniferous evergreens, while the trees in Pearl have leaves—Murmuran “wander[s] nighto the feet of Silpion [the Tree of Silver later known as Telperion]” and islit up by its silver light (Lost Tales I 75) while in Pearl, the trees’ silver leaves“shone with a shimmer of dazzling hue” (Pearl, l. 80; Tolkien’s translation). In Pearl’s river, stones glittered “[a]s stremande sterneƷ” (Pearl, l.115) and in Lórien, Varda “had set stars within [the pools’] depths” (LostTales I 75). Finally, and not least importantly, there are pearls, as gravelunderfoot (Pearl, l. 82) and as a bed for the vat Silindrin, in which the liquid light from Silpion is kept (Lost Tales I 75). Indeed, among the “seeds”used for the Tree of Silver are three huge pearls (Lost Tales I 71).XXXXXXXX names and descriptions changed over the years, and in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, the brothers are called Námo (formerly Vefántur Mandos) andIrmo (formerly Lórien Olofántur), now known by the names of theirdwellings: Mandos and Lórien. Most details about the gardens of Lórienhave been removed; it is said to be the “fairest of all places in the world”(S 28) where the Noldor king Finwë mourns his wife beneath its silverwillows (S 64)—obviously the flora has changed somewhat—and the65Echoes of Pearl in Arda’s LandscapeTree of Silver still illuminates Lórien (S 99). Thus, the gardens retainan echo of silver-leaved trees also in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion. Lórien retains themeaning “dream”, although this is never pointed out explicitly in XXXXXXXXSilmarillion. XXXXXXXX stems ÓLOS/LOS “dream/sleep” are listed in the Etymologies (Lost Road 341-400), a list of primary stems that Christopher Tolkienbelieves to be contemporary with Quenta Silmarillion, the third version ofthe Silmarillion. (Quenta Silmarillion was abandoned for work on XXXXXXXX Lordof the Rings during early 1938 (Lost Road 3, 200, 345; cf. Letters 27, 38).)XXXXXXXX translation of lórien with dream can also be observed in XXXXXXXX Two Towers, where Treebeard translates Lothlórien with Dreamflower (TT III, iv, 456).(XXXXXXXX stem LOT(H) “flower” is likewise found in the Etymologies.) Thus, eventhe garden’s final name reveals it as a dream land.* * *XXXXXXXX Pearl landscape is not only echoed in Lórien in Aman but alsoin the forest realm of the same name (referred to below by its alternativename, Lothlórien, to avoid confusion). XXXXXXXX land in Pearl not only contains“rych reuereƷ” whose banks glow like golden thread (Gordon, Pearl, ll.105-06), its border is defined by a river, the river of death. Lothlórien’sborders are similarly defined by water; the river Anduin and the streamSilverlode protect the heartland of the sylvan realm, although it is enoughto cross the smaller stream Nimrodel to enter the land. In connection tothese watercourses, Shippey draws two parallels between Lothlórien andthe strange land in Pearl. First, he observes that the crossing of Nimrodelbrings consolation to the Company, just as the “adubbemente” of thelandscape makes the Dreamer “al greffe forƷete,” makes him happy, andputs an end to his sorrow (Gordon, Pearl, ll. 85-86, cf. 121-23) and in bothcases, this consolation is only temporary. XXXXXXXX river water removes “thestain of travel,” thus cleaning and restoring lustre to the Company (Author198; Road 218; cf. FR, II, vi, 330). Second, Shippey compares the secondriver that the Company crosses, the Silverlode, to the river that is death inPearl. XXXXXXXX difference, obviously, is that whereas the Company can enterLothlórien, the Dreamer never crosses the river to the Paradise beyondAuthor 198-99; Road 218). Equating the Silverlode with Pearl’s river impliesthat Lothlórien’s heartland would in fact correspond to the Pearl Paradise. Such correspondence is not necessarily corroborated by other Pearlechoes that are found on the other side of the Silverlode, however.Once they have crossed the Silverlode, the Company are all blindfolded until they reach Cerin Amroth. Once Frodo is relieved of hisblindfold, he experiences a world of otherworldly lustre:It seemed to him that he had stepped through a high window that looked on a vanished world. A light was upon it66Stefan Ekmanfor which his language had no name. All that he saw wasshapely, but the shapes seemed at once clear cut, as if theyhad been first conceived and drawn at the uncovering of hiseyes, and ancient as if they had endured for ever. He sawno colour but those he knew, gold and white and blue andgreen, but they were fresh and poignant, as if he had at thatmoment first perceived them and made for them names newand wonderful. (FR, II, vi, 341)XXXXXXXX poignancy of Frodo’s impressions parallels those of the Dreamerin Pearl, who is in what Robert J. Blanch calls a “jewel-garden” which is“bathed in supernatural radiance” and where “everything is effulgentand shimmering” (Blanch 87; cf. Pearl, ll. 73-80). Again, silver trees arepart of the landscape: the tall mallorn have leaves and flowers of gold buttheir bark is silver (RK, VI, ix, 303) and the Company are taken through“rolling woodlands of silver shadows” (FR, II, viii, 362). From the topof Cerin Amroth, Frodo first spies Caras Galadhon, the capital of theGaladhrim. It seems to him that out of it comes the power and light thatholds the land in sway (FR, II, vi, 342). His impression echoes that of theDreamer’s as he first catches a glimpse of New Jerusalem, which shineswith rays brighter than the sun’s (Pearl, l. 982). When the Company arrives at Caras Galadhon, countless green, gold, and silver lights gleamamong the leaves and branches, and singing is heard from on high (FR,II, vii, 344; cf. also FR, II, viii, 361). Again, their experience is similar tothe Dreamer’s, as he walks through a forest where the silver leaves “shonewith a shimmer of dazzling hue” (Pearl, l. 80; Tolkien’s translation) andbirds sing in sweet harmony (Pearl, l. 94). XXXXXXXX habit of sitting in trees andsinging is apparently something the Galadhrim share with their Rivendell kin: when Bilbo first encounters the elves of Elrond’s house, they alsosit in the trees and sing (H, III, 91-92).As with Irmo’s Lórien, the realm of Celeborn and Galadriel sharesmore than some superficial similarities with the Pearl forest. It is juxtaposed with mortality and death and connected to dreams and visions.Most noticeable is the darkness which is pointed out to Frodo as the fastness of Southern Mirkwood with Dol Goldur at its center. XXXXXXXX powerof the elves strives with the dark power in the place where Sauron oncedwelt under the name of the Necromancer (FR, II, ii, 244; FR II, vi, 342-43), a name with etymological ties to blackness as well as death. Deathin Pearl is not as dark, with its offer of Paradise on the other side, but itis just as present (cf. e.g. Pearl, ll. 323-24). Similarly present is the association with dreams and visions. Lothlórien’s name is only its most obviousconnection. As she discusses Lothlórien’s status as dream in A Questionof Time, Flieger calls attention to the etymology of the name as well as67Echoes of Pearl in Arda’s Landscapeits relation to the Vala of Dreams, but also points out that none of theCompany dreams while they are there. Lothlórien is, she suggests, “adream sent or dreamed by the God of Dreams and . . . the Companyin Lórien is, in one sense at least, inside that dream” (Flieger 192). Partof Lothlórien’s dreamlike quality is its temporal vagueness. Althoughcalled attention to only when the Company has left the elves and Sam ispuzzled by the new moon (FR, II, ix, 379), this vagueness pervades theentire Lothlórien episode. Flieger discusses in detail how time flows inLothlórien as compared to the outside world and after having examinedTolkien’s musings on time in Lothlórien from XXXXXXXX Treason of Isengard (367-69), she explains that after an “interior argument,” Tolkien appears todecide that it is “better to have no time difference” between Lothlórienand the outside world. Nevertheless, time in Lothlórien remains vagueand imprecise because “Tolkien’s theme, if not his plot, needed two kindsof time” (Flieger 107; cf. Treason 369).XXXXXXXX clearest example of how time runs differently in the elven forestis provided during the Company’s final day there. XXXXXXXXy rise and walkwith Haldir to the boats, a distance of about ten miles. When “noon [is]at hand,” they reach the tongue of land where the Silverlode passes intoAnduin. XXXXXXXXy pack the boats and go for a test-drive up the Silverlode,where they run into the Lord and Lady of the Land, who announcea parting feast, after which Celeborn informs them of the lay of theland along the river and Galadriel imparts her gifts. XXXXXXXXn the Companyleaves, as a “yellow noon [lies] on the green land” (FR, II, viii, 360-67).Unless the Company and the elves are remarkable efficient with theirpacking, partying, and presents, something has happened to time here. Itseems as if it has almost ceased inside Lothlórien, allowing for a greaternumber of actions than usual to be performed in a briefer (outside) time.XXXXXXXX simplest explanation would be to ascribe this temporal curiosity totextual mistakes, but there is an alternative interpretation. According to“XXXXXXXX Tale of Years,” Frodo and Sam are taken to Galadriel’s Mirror onFebruary 14 and the Company departs on February 16 (RK, AppendixB, 373). Since the hobbits look into the Mirror on what is obviously theCompany’s last evening in Caras Galadhon (FR, II, viii, 358-60), WayneG. Hammond and Christina Scull suggest that a mistake has been madeand that the correct date for the Mirror of Galadriel in “XXXXXXXX Tale ofYears” should be February 15 (Hammond and Scull 718). But would“a writer known for scrupulous attention to the calendar” (Flieger 100)make not one but two mistakes for two consecutive dates? February 16,the day of departure, is the day with two noons. Does one noon, in fact,belong to the 15th and one to the 16th? Does the parting feast take themthrough the night and out on the other side without anyone noticing? DoLothlórien days and nights, up to the very last, pass faster than on the68Stefan Ekmanoutside? This would explain not only what seems like inconsistencies butwould also fit with Sam’s bewildered attempt to recall more than a handful of days of an entire month.XXXXXXXX two noons thus imply both a moment stretched into hours, andhours folded into a brief moment, ultimately suggesting that time in Lothlórien is not simply faster or slower than in the mortal world but followingcompletely different rules. This calls to mind Annika Sylén Lagerholm’scomment that the Pearl Dreamer “go[es] back in time to an experience ofan intrinsically atemporal sphere” (Lagerholm 43, my emphasis). Likethe Dreamer, Frodo experiences a shift to a timeless (atemporal) land. Timein Lothlórien is often expressed in terms of experience, as when it seemsto Frodo that he has stepped over a bridge of time into the Elder Days(FR, II, vi, 340) or when he feels himself to be in a timeless land whichnever fades, changes, or falls into forgetfulness (FR, II, vi, 342). In Pearl,the otherwordly, atemporal sphere of the dream is linked to the divine(Lagerholm 44); in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, otherwordly, timeless Lothlórienis, at least in some ways, linked to a divine being, the Vala of Dream.Once they have been left, the Pearl and Lothlórien dream-times differ, each representing not only dream-time but the temporal differencebetween Faerie and the mortal world (cf. Langford 948). Whereas theDreamer wakes up to find himself back where and, since he refers to hisspiritual journey simply as a dream or vision (e.g Pearl, ll. 1170, 1180),presumably reasonably close to when he fell asleep, the Company leavesLothlórien to find that much more time has passed in the world outside than they had experienced during their stay with the Galadhrim(FR, II, ix, 379). Furthermore, where the Pearl dream-land is an eternalrealm with “kytheƷ þat lasteƷ aye” (Gordon, Pearl, l. 1198), Lothlórien isdoomed to wither and die once the power of the elves wanes. XXXXXXXX senseof timelessness, of atemporality, is present throughout the Company’sstay in the Elvish domain, however, even though the difference in time isnever quite defined. Flieger links this difference to the theme of Deathand Immortality (investigated further in A Question of Time). This theme,she explains, requires a difference in time which is “important enough tobe noticed but too important to be made explicit” (Flieger 107).While most of Lothlórien’s dreamlike qualities are implicit, its association to visions is all the more explicit. From her first meeting withthe Company, Galadriel makes clear her farseeing abilities, telling themthat she knows that Gandalf left with them and that he did not enter theland. She adds that there are limits to her powers; she is unable to seeGandalf unless he is within the borders of her land (FR, II, vii, 346). XXXXXXXXmost obvious visions, of course, are those that Sam and Frodo receivethrough her Mirror. Although the Silmarillion version of Lórien only mentions the concept of visions in passing, XXXXXXXX Book of Lost Tales explains how,69Echoes of Pearl in Arda’s Landscapegazing into Silindrin, Lórien Olofántur sees “many visions of mysterypass across its [Silindrin’s] face” (Lost Tales I 75), visions similar to whatthe hobbits see in the Mirror of Galadriel. While the Pearl vision includessilver-leafed trees, however, the most ubiquitous image is the pearls; notonly as part of the setting but as the poem’s most powerful symbol. InMurmuran, Silindrin rests on a bed of pearls but contains the liquid lightfrom the Tree of Silver, directly associating visions with pearls as well assilver. XXXXXXXX association with silver is even more pronounced in Lothlórien:with a silver ewer, Galadriel fills a silver basin with water from a silverstream, which springs from a fountain lit by silver lamps (FR, II, vii, 345,352). Eärendil, the evening star, that shines down on the Mirror, containsthe light of the last silmaril (S 250; FR, II, i, 229), a light which, in turn,stems from the Trees of Silver and Gold, Telperion and Laurelin (S 67et passim).Lothlórien, while sometimes referred to as the Golden Wood (FR, II,vi, 328, 329 et passim) is in fact just as much a place of silver. XXXXXXXX leavesof the mallorn trees might be golden but their bark is silver and they growbeside the Silverlode, and the name of the silver-haired Lord of Lothlórien, Celeborn, means Tree of Silver (S Index 321). In other words,silver trees dominate Lothlórien just as they do the two other gardens ofdreams and visions.* * *Thus, echoes from the Pearl vision’s dreamland reverberates in Tolkien’s works. XXXXXXXX Middle English poem provided an impetus for Tolkiento write “XXXXXXXX Nameless Land,” but Pearl’s wonderful, mysterious settingalso worked itself into the much larger world of Arda. XXXXXXXXre it mixedwith other echoes of other places, but some central ideas remained, ideasof dreams, visions, death and Paradise, and the pervasive but faint image of silver trees. Ultimately, that is what the Pearl landscape is about:dreams, visions, death and Paradise—and leaves glittering like burnishedsilver in the sunlight.WORKS CITEDBlanch, Robert J. “Precious Metal and Gem Symbolism in Pearl.” In SirGawain and Pearl: Critical Essays. Ed. Robert J. Blanch. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1966: 86-97.Carpenter, Humphrey. Tolkien: A Biography. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,1977.Flieger, Verlyn. A Question of Time: J.R.R. Tolkien’s Road to Faërie. Kent,Ohio: Kent State University Press, 1997.70Stefan EkmanGordon, E. V., ed. Pearl. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1953.Hammond, Wayne G., and Christina Scull. XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings: A Reader’s Companion. London: HarperCollins, 2005.Langford, David. “Time in Faerie.” In XXXXXXXX Encyclopedia of Fantasy. Ed.John Clute and John Grant. New York: St. Martin’s Griffin,1999: 948.Pearl. Trans. by J.R.R. Tolkien. Ed. Christopher Tolkien, Sir Gawain and theGreen Knight, Pearl, and Sir Orfeo. London: Allen & Unwin, 1975.Shippey, T. A. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. London: HarperCollins,2000.———. XXXXXXXX Road to Middle-earth: How J.R.R. Tolkien Created a New Mythology. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2003.Sylén Lagerholm, Annika. Pearl and Contemplative Writing. Ed. MarianneThormählen and Beatrice Warren. Lund: Department of English, Lund University, 2003. Lund Studies in English.Tolkien, Christopher. “Preface.” In Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl,and Sir Orfeo, trans. J.R.R. Tolkien. London: Allen & Unwin,1975: 7-9.Tolkien, J.R.R. “Sir Gawain and the Green Knight.” In XXXXXXXX Monstersand the Critics and Other Essays. Ed. Christopher Tolkien. London:HarperCollins, 1997: 72-108.———, trans. Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl, Sir Orfeo. London: Allen & Unwin, 1975.71Copyright © West Virginia University PressCouncils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey TowardsKingship in J.R.R. Tolkien’s XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsand Peter Jackson’s XXXXXXXX Lord of the RingsJUDY ANN FORD AND ROBIN ANNE REIDWithin ondary, yet independently important, to the main plot of the de XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings the return of the king to Gondor is sec- -struction of the Ring. Destroying the Ring will save Middle-earth fromfalling under the shadow of Sauron, but it will take the true king—Aragorn—to restore the world of men to its former glory. Aragorn must notmerely help defeat Sauron or rule a great kingdom; he must serve as theagent of Gondor’s renewal on both the material and spiritual levels. Hisdestiny is inherent in his name: having entered Minas Tirith, Aragornsays: “‘. . . for in the high tongue of old I am Elessar, the Elfstone, andEnvinyatar, the Renewer’. . .” (RK, V, viii, 141). It is made clear throughout J.R.R. Tolkien’s novel that Aragorn is a character conscious of hisdestiny and determined to fulfill it. In contrast, the Aragorn of PeterJackson’s film version of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings is far less certain about hisdestiny; he is a more modern, self-doubting hero.1 XXXXXXXXse two versions ofAragorn both arrive at the same narrative resolution, namely, becoming the king who restores the world of men to the glory of earlier ages,but their narrative arcs describe two quite different paths. This papercompares the treatment of Aragorn’s relationship to the office of kingin Tolkien’s novel and Jackson’s film by exploring the different culturalconcepts of kingship and heroism that inform the two versions of thecharacter. In both versions, the events of the Council of Elrond prove tobe crucial to Aragorn’s narrative journey and thus are a central focus ofdiscussion.In the novel, Tolkien incorporates many elements from the literature and culture of the Middle Ages, particularly the early Middle Ages,roughly the sixth through the tenth centuries. XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings is,among other things, his attempt to create the sort of story that could havebeen told by Anglo Saxons, filled with their beliefs, values, and ideologies,adapted to the modern form of a novel. Many medieval elements of XXXXXXXXLord of the Rings have been analyzed by scholars, especially Tolkien’s useof literary, linguistic, and mythological sources, but little attention hasbeen paid to his incorporation of early medieval concepts of kingship.2Tolkien’s conception of Aragorn as king was influenced by Anglo-Saxon,and more broadly, early Germanic ideas.Anglo-Saxons, like the other Germanic peoples who settled into72Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reidterritories once held by the Roman Empire, assimilated elements fromRome but continued to hold on to much of their earlier culture. Duringthe centuries of migration, settlement, and the establishment of politicalstates, Germanic kingship, not surprisingly, evolved a good deal, boththrough contact with Rome and the force of circumstances. It is not thepurpose of this paper to trace out the complexity of these developments,but rather to focus on the characteristics that broadly typified Germanickingship in contrast to later European ideas of kingship which are moreavailable to modern readers. Scholars in Tolkien’s time, the mid-twentieth century, argued that in pagan Germanic culture, kingship was sacral,that is, it was grounded in a religious purpose.3XXXXXXXX king’s principal role, according to this theory, was to preserve thepeople through his relationship with the gods. He was the head priest,performing rituals and making sacrifices for victory in war and prosperity in peace, but the king was much more than an impersonal enactor ofritual. Germanic kings traced their ancestry back to a god; Anglo-Saxonkings commonly claimed descent from Woden. This divine ancestry wasbelieved to endow royal blood with a portion of divine wisdom and supernatural power. XXXXXXXX king’s relationship with the gods was believed tobe crucial to the survival of the nation. XXXXXXXX people expected to receiveguidance from the gods through their king and to be connected to thegods through their oaths to the king. XXXXXXXX king had to bless the fields tobring fruitful harvests. If the crops failed, the king was blamed, and couldhimself be sacrificed to the gods to restore the prosperity of the people.This sacrifice may have happened in the case of King Olaf Tretelgia ofSweden, who was burned in his house as an offering to Odin (Chaney15). In short, according to pagan Germanic cultural ideas, the king wasthe embodiment of the well-being of his people. He served as a livinglink to the gods, and brought to the people luck and supernatural power(12-24).This belief in the sacral character of kingship was to persist to adegree throughout the Middle Ages even though the concepts of royalpower underwent slow modification under the influence of Christianityand Roman imperial models. In the eighth century, to Christianize thetraditional religious character of Germanic kingship, the church beganto anoint kings in liturgical ceremonies similar to those used to consecrate bishops and priests (Zacour 97). XXXXXXXX king’s pagan sacral status wastransmuted to a Christian sacramental position: chosen for royal office byGod; the king was called upon to uphold divine law, defend Christianity,protect the weak, and rule justly. Prior to standardization in the twelfthcentury, royal coronations were often listed among the sacraments. Later medieval kings, deprived of both the pagan claim to divine ancestryand the Christian status of sacramental coronation, eagerly sought the73Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingshipcanonization of their ancestors in order to claim descent from saints.Other signs of close connections between royal families and the divinewere sought in the later Middle Ages through claims such as that of thekings of France that God sent from heaven the oil used in royal coronations. Sacral and sacramental kingship became less important in Englandafter the Norman Conquest of 1066 when the more secular and contractual concept of feudal kingship took precedence. Nevertheless, remnantsof sacral kingship stayed alive in feudal and post-feudal England, as wellas elsewhere in Europe, through such beliefs as the Royal Touch: thebelief that some semi-divine quality of royal blood allowed kings to curescrofula, a skin disease, through touch alone (Myers 167).XXXXXXXX sacral model of kingship influenced the method by which kingswere selected. In early modern and modern Europe, primogeniture dictated orderly inheritance of royal titles from father to eldest son, notwithstanding the heir’s competence to rule. In pagan Germanic Europe,primogeniture did not dictate the inheritance of a royal title. A familyline claimed divine favor through descent from a god, but not all in theline would be believed to possess the same charismatic power on whichthe tribe would depend. XXXXXXXX people, however constituted, would elector choose from among the members of a royal house, or houses, thecandidate who seemed most obviously to possess divine favor. XXXXXXXX favorof the gods, or later, God, was believed to be manifested through luck, orlater, grace or blessing, which was not interpreted as random chance butrather the intervention of the divine into the world of men. A candidatefor king would be believed to be close to the divine if he demonstratedluck, especially in military matters. A candidate could also demonstratehis close relationship to the divine by manifesting supernatural abilities,such as prophecy or the ability to heal (Meyers 2-4; Zacour 97).This concept of a sacral king who is both a descendant of the godsand a mediator between them and the people seems to have guidedTolkien’s construction of Aragorn’s journey towards kingship. In orderfor Aragorn to restore the world of men, he must show the people ofGondor that he is a living link to the gods, a man whose luck in battleand supernatural powers prove his divine favor and justify his assumptionof kingship.Germanic ideas of kingship serve to explain much about how Aragorn’s narrative is constructed in the novel. XXXXXXXXy provide a reason for Tolkien’s creation of a family line for Aragorn extending back to a god. XXXXXXXXchapter “XXXXXXXX Council of Elrond” is where the reader first learns thatStrider is Aragorn: “‘He is Aragorn son of Arathorn,’ said Elrond; ‘andhe is descended through many fathers from Isildur Elendil’s son of MinasIthil” (FR, II, ii, 260). Elendil and his sons, Isildur and Anarion, wereleaders of the Faithful, the small group of Númenorians who refused to74Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reidbe persuaded by Sauron to defy the Valar and who escaped the destruction of the kingdom of Númenor, fled to Middle-earth, and establishedtwo realms: Arnor, in the North, and Gondor, in the South. Elendil, asHigh King, died fighting Sauron, and his son Isildur cut the one Ringfrom Sauron’s hand, winning the War of the Last Alliance and givingMiddle-earth centuries of peace (RK, VI, A, 325-27). Aragorn’s ancestryestablishes that he is not only descended from a royal line, but from aline that traces its origin back to a god. Aragorn, Isildur, and Elendilare all descendants of Melian, a Maia. XXXXXXXX Maiar were spirits of thesame nature as the Valar, but a lesser order; they were the servants andhelpers of the Valar. XXXXXXXX Valar and the Maiar were types of planetarydeities in Tolkien’s complex mythology, creatures of Ilúvatar, the OneGod, but operationally gods in Middle-earth. Melian married an elf,Thingol, soon after the appearance of the elves in Middle-earth.4 XXXXXXXXirdaughter, Lúthien, married a human, Beren.5 Lúthien and Beren’s greatgrandsons, Elrond and Elros, chose different paths; the latter choosing tobe mortal. XXXXXXXX kings of Númenor descended from Elros, and Aragorndescended from them.Germanic ideas of kingship also clarify the reason why Aragorn isnot accepted as king of Gondor even though no one at the Council of Elrond expresses any doubts that Elrond correctly identified Aragorn’s lineage. At the Council, except for Bilbo, whose poem promises that “XXXXXXXXcrownless again shall be king,” no one expresses the idea that Aragornshould be crowned. If the peoples of Middle-earth were operating on anidea of kingship as a human office descending through primogeniture,the Council presumably would have recognized Aragorn as king onceElrond explained his ancestry. Clearly they were not using primogenitureas their model for choosing kings. XXXXXXXX reaction of the Council to the information that Aragorn is Isildur’s heir reflects instead a notion of kingship in which a candidate’s bloodline makes him eligible to be king, but isnot in itself sufficient to make him king. Boromir, the next in line for theoffice of the Steward of Gondor, reacts in conformity with idea that atrue king will possess luck inherited from his ancestors when he expressesthe hope that Aragorn can win victory against Sauron and save Gondor,if he is really a king. Boromir says: “‘Mayhap the Sword-that-was-Brokenmay still stem the tide—if the hand that wields it has inherited not anheirloom only, but the sinews of the Kings of Men.’ ‘Who can tell?’ saidAragorn. ‘But we will put it to the test one day. ‘May that day not be toolong delayed,” said Boromir. ‘For though I do not ask for aid, we needit’” (FR, II, ii, 281).Aragorn does not seem to expect the others to accept him as kingsimply because of his lineage. He promises to return with Boromir toGondor to help fight Sauron but makes no demand to rule there. Before75Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingshipbeing crowned, Aragorn must demonstrate that he is worthy of beingking by showing not only that he has the favor of the gods through hispossession of luck, especially through victory in battle, but also that hisdivine inheritance is active, a quality shown through supernatural abilities, such as the ability to heal. In the novel XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, Aragorn’s coronation as king is not delayed for personal or tactical reasons, forexample, because he is unsure that he wants the office, or because thesteward’s son resists him. Aragorn’s narrative arc in the novel traces hisattempts to prove his luck and his supernatural qualities in order to berecognized as king.Between the Council of Elrond and his coronation, Aragorn’s storyline demonstrates that he possesses the sacral qualities that would markhim as a true king. He has victory in battle, showing his luck in combatin situations too numerous to recount. He also is shown to possess supernatural powers. Aragorn is able to command the Army of the Dead(remnants of a people who had sworn to aid Isildur in his fight againstSauron and who could not die until they fulfilled their oath to Isildur’sheir) and to use a palantír: both abilities are presented as a consequenceof his bloodline, things which could be achieved only by Isildur’s heir.Both are tests: episodes in which Aragorn is able to demonstrate that heinherited the full measure of the qualities of his ancestors.Even more telling is that Tolkien endows Aragorn with the supernatural quality a modern reader would be most likely to identify as a markof sacral kingship, because it is the characteristic that survived longestinto modern times: the ability to heal. Aragorn is able to use a plant,athelas or kingsfoil, to cure injuries caused by the Black Riders, both to thespirit and the body, doing so at Weathertop and the Houses of Healing.Tolkien makes clear that Aragorn’s use of athelas is supernatural, rootedin his inherited royal characteristics rather than in any mundane knowledge of herbs. Aragorn inherited the ability to use athelas medicinallyfrom his family line: it is a quality possessed in an even greater degree byhis elder relative, Elrond (RK, V, vi, 141). Others know about athelas butthose who know healing plants, such as Ioreth and the herb-master in theHouses of Healing, dismiss it as lacking medicinal qualities. But the herbmaster remembers a rhyme recited only by old wives, such as Ioreth, thatexplained its relationship to the king: “come athelas! come athelas! Lifeto the dying/In the king’s hand lying!” (RK, V, viii, 140), and, as Gandalfquotes Ioreth, “XXXXXXXX hands of the king are the hands of a healer, and soshall the rightful king be know.” (RK, V, viii, 140). Faramir, once he ishealed by Aragorn with athelas, immediately recognizes him as the trueking:76Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne ReidSuddenly Faramir stirred, and he opened his eyes, and helooked on Aragorn who bent over him; and a light of knowledge and love was kindled in his eyes, and he spoke softly.‘My lord, you called me. I come. What does the kingcommand?’‘Walk no more in the shadows, but awake!’ said Aragorn.‘You are weary. Rest a while, and take food, and be readywhen I return.’‘I will, lord,’ said Faramir. ‘For who would lie idle whenthe king has returned?’ (RK, V, viii, 144)XXXXXXXX people of Gondor quickly follow Faramir’s lead; the text reads:“And soon the word had gone out from the House that the king wasindeed come among them, and after the war he brought healing; andthe news ran through the City.” (RK, V, viii, 145). Aragorn’s use of athelasto heal those affected by the Black Breath of the Nazgûl, which harmsthe spirit more than the body, allows the people of Gondor to recognizeAragorn as a true king.Aragorn’s story is one in which he proves that he has “the sinews ofthe Kings of Men,” and that he has as much right to rule as did his illustrious ancestors. After he has proven himself, Aragorn is crowned. Itis significant that Aragorn is crowned by Gandalf, a Maia, underscoringthe sacral nature of the coronation and perhaps echoing the imperialcoronation by Pope Leo III of Charlemagne, a early-medieval king famous for his efforts to renew a fallen empire. Immediately after Aragornis crowned, “all that beheld him gazed in silence, for it seemed to themthat he was revealed to them now for the first time. Tall as the sea-kingsof old, he stood above all that were near; ancient of days he seemed andyet in the flower of manhood . . .” (RK, VI, v, 246). Aragorn, in his resemblance to “the sea-kings of old,” that is, the Númenorians, embodies thelink between his people and their Edenic past, uniting the past with thepresent and the people with the gods. During his reign as king, Gondoris restored to its earlier grandeur and renews its alliances with the otherPeoples of Middle-earth:In his time the City was made more fair than it had ever been,even in the days of its first glory; and it was filled with treesand with fountains, and its gates were wrought of mithriland steel, and its streets were paved with white marble; andthe Folk of the Mountain laboured in it, and the Folk ofthe Wood rejoiced to come there; and all was healed andmade good, and the houses were filled with men and womenand the laughter of children, and no window was blind norany courtyard empty; and after the ending of the Third Age77Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingshipof the world into the new age it preserved the memory andglory of the years that were gone (RK, VI, v, 246).It seems clear that just as Tolkien wove into his work the language andliterature of the early Middle Ages, he used their notions of kingship toground his creation of Aragorn.But what of Peter Jackson’s Aragorn? One study has already beenpublished on Jackson’s adaptation of the Council of Elrond, although itdoes not address the issue of kingship. In “‘Elisions and Ellipses:’ Counsel and Council in Tolkien’s and Jackson’s XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,” JudithKollmann notes the importance of councils and counsel in Tolkien’s novel and offers a close reading of the Council scenes in both book and film.Her overall evaluation is that the sequence as constructed by Jacksonshifts the focus from Frodo to Aragorn.6 Kollmann argues that, “exceptfor the fact that Frodo is healed at Rivendell and reunited with Gandalfand Bilbo, that Boromir, Legolas and Gimli arrive, that the Council ofElrond does take place and that the nine members of the Fellowship arechosen, virtually everything is changed” (155). She does not enumeratethe changes in her analysis, but offers a narrative summary of actionand speech. Her conclusion is that Jackson’s framing of the Council withscenes between Aragorn and Boromir and Aragorn and Arwen before,and with Aragorn at his mother’s grave after, shifts the focus of the sequence to Aragorn and away from the hobbits. Her conclusion appearsto be valid but limited; the work of analyzing the impact that shift andother changes have on characterizations and plot development remainsto be done. In this essay, we argue that one consequence of these changesis the re-fashioning of Aragorn as a modern, self-doubting hero, a shiftthat is supported by original scenes written for the film that precede the“Council of Elrond” (Scene 27): “XXXXXXXX Sword That Was Broken” (Scene25), and “XXXXXXXX Evenstar” (Scene 26).7In the novel, Aragorn expresses no doubts about whether his royallineage endows him with the capacity to rule; his narrative arc is shapedby his need to demonstrate to others that he possesses the requisite luckand supernatural power to serve as a living link to the divine. Tolkien’sAragorn, echoing the heroic characters of medieval epics, is constructedprimarily through external actions, frequently directed towards preparing himself to wear the crown. Certainly there are moments when thereader is given access, through narration and dialogue, to Aragorn’sthoughts, and there are even times when the reader is shown that Aragorn doubts the correctness of his decisions.8 But these internal and shortlived doubts never concern Aragorn’s capacity to rule or his desire to beking: they only concern specific actions that might be taken to achievethe goals of destroying the Ring and becoming king.78Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne ReidIn contrast, in the film, Aragorn is shown as fearing what he inheritedfrom his lineage as a weakness that might render him unfit to rule. As aresult of the changes in characterization, Aragorn’s narrative arc in thefilm is primarily internal: he needs to overcome his own doubts abouthis self-worth. In the novel, Aragorn needs to convince others of whohe is; in the film, Aragorn needs to change himself, to overcome his owndoubts. In a scene that is completely original to the film, before Aragorn’slineage is described, before he is revealed to be anyone but Strider, theRanger, the audience is told that Aragorn has rejected the very idea ofbeing king (Scene 24 “XXXXXXXX Fate of the Ring”). In the discussion of howbest to face the dual threat of Sauron and Saruman, Elrond states thatneither Elves nor Dwarves can lead the fight; when Gandalf expresseshis belief that men are the ones to lead, Elrond doubts not only the abilities of men, based on his experience of Isildur’s weakness in refusing todestroy the Ring, but also points out that Aragorn rejected the positionof king. Aragorn’s name is not actually mentioned in this scene; but animmediate cut to a close-up of Aragorn’s face follows the dialogue, andthe film audience soon learns that Elrond was referring to Aragorn.Within the film, as within the novel, crucial elements shaping Aragorn’s character are shown at the Council of Elrond, and, in the caseof film, the framing scenes set in Elrond’s house in Imladris before theCouncil. It is there, in the chamber where Frodo recovers from the Nazgûlknife wound, that Elrond tells Gandalf that Aragorn turned away fromthe path of kingship. In the extended edition of the film, a key scenereiterates Aragorn’s rejection of kingship: Aragorn, at his mother’s gravein Imladris, tells Elrond directly that he never wanted the power to wieldthe sword Narsil, a central symbol of Aragorn’s relationship to the crownof Gondor in both the novel and the film (Fellowship, scene 28: “Gilraen’sMemorial”).9 Not wanting to wield Narsil means not wanting to be king.In a critical scene preceding the Council of Elrond, Narsil is againused to illustrate a presentation of Aragorn’s potential kingship that differs markedly from the novel. Aragorn and Boromir meet in the libraryof Elrond’s house prior to the Council and talk in front of the shardsof Narsil. This scene does not appear in Tolkien’s novel, although someof the dialogue draws upon dialogue between these two characters elsewhere in the book. In the novel, Aragorn carries the shards of this swordwith him as a talisman of his royal lineage: the broken sword embodiesthe image of a line of kingship broken when the Stewards of Gondor andtheir advisors refused to consider the claims of Aragorn’s ancestors to thethrone to be legitimate.10 In the film, the sword also symbolizes Aragorn’sroyal lineage, but it is one that he has put aside, left in Rivendell on display as if in a museum. In the film, Boromir meets Aragorn, who sits,reading a book, in the room where shards of Narsil are displayed. XXXXXXXXy79Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingshipdo not know one another and Aragorn declines to provide his name, soBoromir’s statements about the sword are made without his knowing thathe is in the presence of a descendant of its most famous owner. Boromir’sfeeling of awe when he first sees the sword soon changes. He refers to thesword not as an “heirloom,” as he does in the novel, but a “broken heirloom” as he lifts it up and, after some hesitancy, lets it drop to the floor(Scene 25, “XXXXXXXX Sword That Was Broken”). This scene underscores thedistance that Aragorn in the film has placed between himself and kingship, and it also indicates that Boromir, as a representative of Gondor,has respect for the memory of Isildur but does not revere Aragorn’s lineas the true line of kings for the southern kingdom.In another critical framing scene, one which immediately follows thescene with Boromir, Arwen talks to Aragorn about his fears regardingkingship and then pledges to become mortal, to marry him. In the bookFellowship, Arwen appears in one scene only in which Frodo sees her at afeast at Elrond’s house, and the discussion between her and Aragorn isrelated only in Appendix A. XXXXXXXX story of Aragorn and Arwen that appears in Appendix A was drawn upon to a great extent by the writers anddirector of the film in creating Arwen’s character. In the scene which precedes the Council meeting and follows Aragorn’s meeting with Boromir,while Aragorn picks up the piece of Narsil dropped by Boromir, Arwenasks him what he finds to fear in the past. Aragorn answers that Isildur’sblood runs through him, and with it, “the same weakness,” that is, theflaw in Isildur that led him to succumb to the Ring, keeping it when hehad the chance to destroy it, a decision that led him to his death. Arwenreassures Aragorn that he is “Isildur’s heir, not Isildur himself,” that shebelieves he will succeed where his ancestor did not—resisting the temptation of the Ring and conquering Sauron. In other words, she believesthat he may have power even though his illustrious ancestor was weak(Scene 26, “XXXXXXXX Evenstar”). Her words stating Aragorn is “Isildur’s heirnot Isildur himself ” actually mirror a line of dialogue given to Aragornin the book, in a very different context. Speaking to Boromir, Aragornacknowledges that he bears little resemblance to the statues of the famouskings of old, stating, “I am but the heir of Isildur, not Isildur himself ”(FR, II, ii, 261). In the book, Aragorn makes it clear, as do other narrativeelements, that men, and the other races of Middle-earth, have degenerated since earlier Ages. His words imply his acknowledgment that hecould not hope to match Isildur’s greatness. XXXXXXXX same words, spokenby Arwen, reverse Aragorn’s relationship with his lineage: instead of hisancestry providing, as it does in the novel, the grounding of his right torule, in the film it serves as the source of Aragorn’s self-doubt, as the reason why he chooses not to be king. He must overcome that obstacle, thatperception of inherited weakness.80Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne ReidXXXXXXXX pivotal scene showing the difference in constructions of kingshipand of Aragorn is Scene 27, “XXXXXXXX Council of Elrond,” which differsfrom the book chapter in many respects. XXXXXXXX book chapter has at leasttwenty different characters who speak: twelve of them in the room speaking in the present of the narrative and another eight whose dialogue isreported in lengthy passages by several of the main speakers.11 Somecharacters talk for pages, such as Elrond and Gandalf, and are majorcharacters in the action of the book; others have only a line or two, forexample, Galdor, Glorfindel, Erestor, Frodo, Sam; at least two of theseare never seen again in the novel. In the film, the speaking parts are cutfrom twelve to ten, with many sections of dialogue cut, and specific stories and topics removed entirely or shifted to other places in the film.12XXXXXXXX shift in number of characters speaking is more significant than thenumbers initially suggest because all minor characters are eliminated interms of speaking parts: Gloin, Galdor, Erestor, Glorfindel specifically, aswell as all the characters whose speech is reported by other characters,primarily to fill in background information.13 XXXXXXXX speaking parts in thefilm are given to the nine members of the Fellowship, several of whomare speaking for the first time in the film (Legolas, Gimli, and Boromir),and to Elrond, with the exception of some of the background charactersin the Council who are shown arguing at one point but whose words arenot easily audible to the film audience.XXXXXXXX difference in content is even more striking. XXXXXXXX chapter containsmuch more exposition: on the history of Middle-earth, the long conflictwith Sauron, and current events. In the film scene, much of the exposition is missing, having been moved to other parts of the film or cut. XXXXXXXXchapter in the book contains much more debate, reasoned debate overthe history and the nature of the Ring, whether Bilbo’s Ring is in factSauron’s Ring, and what is the best of several possible solutions to dealwith the problem, while in the film, debate quickly devolves into a shouting match with no question whatsoever that this Ring is the One Ring.In the film, Elrond is much more directive in stating the purpose fromthe start: he has called them together; they must deal with the Ring. XXXXXXXXaction of the scene moves more quickly to the formation of the Fellowship, a resolution not given in the book chapter. As Kollmann notes, thechanges shift the focus to Aragorn. However, the change affects otherelements of the narrative as well.XXXXXXXX Council of Elrond in the film continues the presentation ofAragorn’s kingship established in the framing scenes, both in regard tohis own reluctance and to the resistance of Gondor to his rule, at leastas represented by Boromir. In the book chapter, when Aragorn producesthe shards of Narsil, Elrond explains Aragorn’s lineage to the group, including the history of the Northern line in the war against evil, as part of81Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingshipthe larger exposition of the past. In the film, Legolas, not Elrond, identifies Aragorn as the heir of Isildur, and he does so not as part of an exposition of history but as a direct statement to Boromir that Boromir owesAragorn allegiance because he is Isildur’s heir. This concept of kingship,in which Aragorn is owed the crown solely through primogeniture, isquite different from the concept expressed in the novel. Aragorn, insteadof producing family heirlooms or making any other gesture connectinghimself with his lineage, merely asks Legolas to sit down. He does notreject the idea of kingship descending through primogeniture; he merelydoes not want his inheritance discussed. In the book chapter, Boromir acknowledges that the return of Elendil’s sword would be a “boon,” if sucha thing is possible, and if Aragorn is able to wield it. In the film, Boromirsneers at the idea that he owes allegiance to Aragorn. His derision is notdirected at the concept of kingship implicit in Legolas’s statement; theBoromir of the film seems also to accept the notion of rule based on primogeniture. Instead, Jackson’s Boromir rejects the necessity of kingshipaltogether, saying “Gondor has no king. Gondor needs no king.” At nopoint in the book does Boromir, or any character, reject or even questionmonarchy as a form of government; the only doubt concerns Aragorn’sfitness to rule. Even Denethor, who, in the novel, rejects Aragorn’s claimto rule over Gondor, accepts monarchy as Gondor’s proper form of government. He says to Gandalf that “‘. . . the rule of Gondor, my lord, ismine and no other man’s unless the king should come again.’” (RK, V,i, 30). Moreover, Denethor’s rejection of Aragorn as an “upstart,” the“last of a ragged house long bereft of lordship and dignity,” is spoken inthe context of his suicidal despair, and his opinion of Aragorn is madea symptom of the culmination of Denethor’s fatal character flaw: hisunwilling to accept change (RK, V, vii, 130).From the Council of Elrond to the end of the novel XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings and the end of the film XXXXXXXX Fellowship of the Ring, Aragorn is engaged in a very different secondary project. In both, his primary goal isthe destruction of the Ring. In the novel, Aragorn must also demonstratethat he possesses the divine spark inherited through his bloodline whichmakes him worthy of being king. In the film, Aragorn must overcome thedistrust of the anti-monarchical heir to the stewardship of Gondor. Hisnarrative arc in the film thus becomes more relational and less epic, morepolitical and less mythic.14 It culminates in a scene not narrated in thenovel: Boromir’s death. In the novel, Aragorn finds Boromir, injured, andlearns that the Orcs have taken “the Halflings” captive; Boromir has onlya few more lines of dialogue before his death: first, he expresses regretfor having tried to take the Ring from Frodo; second, he says “Farewell,Aragorn! Go to Minas Tirith and save my People! I have failed” (TT, III,i, 16). Aragorn reassures Boromir, but the scene is quite short. XXXXXXXXre is82Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reidno narrative depiction of the fight scene or of the hobbits being takencaptive. In striking contrast, at the end of the first film, Boromir’s deathscene and his redemption is made the climax: after his attempt to takethe Ring from Frodo, he is next seen coming to fight the Orcs on behalf of Merry and Pippin (Scene 45 “XXXXXXXX Departure of Boromir). XXXXXXXXscene contains an extensive combat sequence in which Boromir fights ondespite multiple wounds, beyond all human strength. He has a lengthydeath scene in Aragorn’s arms in which his final words end the personalconflict the film established between them at the Council of Elrond: Boromir has lost hope, and believes his people will be extinguished. Aragorn reassures him that he will go to Minas Tirith, that he will not let theWhite Tower fall, or their people fail. In response, Boromir says that hewould have followed Aragorn, calling him “my brother, my captain, myKing.” His narrative and character arc has led him to change his beliefsconcerning Aragorn as king: he accepts the idea of monarchy, and withit, Aragorn as heir to the throne.15Aragorn’s internal struggle, his reluctance to becoming king, established in the film in the Council of Elrond and its framing scenes, is notresolved until much later, in the film XXXXXXXX Return of the King. In two scenesnot present in the novel, Scene 10, “XXXXXXXX Reforging of Narsil,” and Scene30, “ Andúril Flame of the West,” Arwen demands that Elrond reforgeNarsil and carry it to Aragorn. Elrond does so, riding to where Aragornis encamped with the Rohirrim, and offers the final argument to encourage the still reluctant Aragorn to take the sword and become king. XXXXXXXXonly way to win the war, Elrond argues, is to have more forces; the onlyforces not committed to one side or the other are the Army of the Deadwho will only follow the King of Gondor. Elrond persuades Aragornthat he must take upon himself the responsibility of being king, bothbecause he was born to it and because he is needed. This scene parallelsGandalf ’s earlier encouragement of Aragorn to help Théoden and theRohirrim hold their ground at Isengard. In a dramatic gesture, Elrondpresents the sword to Aragorn who pauses, then draws it, saying “Sauronwill not have forgotten the Sword of Elendil. XXXXXXXX Blade that was brokenshall return to Minas Tirith” (Scene 30, “Andúril Flame of the West”). Itis only at this point, near the end of the film trilogy, that Jackson’s Aragorn resolves his internal struggle with self-doubt.Critical reception of Jackson’s film has been mixed. A number ofthe essays produced by literary scholars evaluating how well the film“adapted” the book have been fairly negative.16 Much of the scholarship on the film as adaptation has come from medievalists who draw onliterary methodologies, not a surprising development given the extent towhich medievalists have dominated the scholarly analysis and teachingof Tolkien’s novel since the 1970s, despite strong objections from some of83Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingshiptheir colleagues who subscribe to the aesthetics of the Modernist canonwhich condemns Tolkien’s fiction as popular and thus without merit. Asfilm scholars, including Karen Kline, have noted: when literary scholarsapproach film adaptations, their tendency is to compare the “literary” elements of the film, such as plot, characterization, themes, to those of thenovel, and to ignore or downplay cinematic elements, such as cinematography, costuming, sets, light, and sound, including the soundtrack. Suchan approach almost always leads to some variant of the argument thatthe film is inferior to the novel. Within film studies, the issue of adaptation is approached rather differently and with greater precision. Filmscholarship can, among other things, shift the analysis away from theassumption that the novel is the primary text.Karen Kline’s adaptation theory identifies four paradigms for analysis of films based on other texts, each involving different assumptionsand methodologies: translation, pluralist, transformation, and materialist. She argues that one reason why the same film may receive a widerange of different critical evaluations is that different writers are workingfrom different paradigms, often without considering the underlying assumptions and values placed on the two texts, or without realizing theexistence of other paradigms. XXXXXXXX four paradigms, briefly, are as follows:the translation paradigm is concerned with how faithful the film is to thenovel, especially with regard to literary elements such as character, plot,and theme; the pluralist paradigm independently evaluates the film’s fictional world, which may connect to the novel only on an emotional orintellectual level; the transformation paradigm assumes the novel is onlyraw material which will be changed significantly in the film which is anoriginal work in its own right (in this paradigm, knowledge of the novel isnot considered necessary for writing about the film); and finally, the materialist paradigm considers the novel as only one source element in thefilm, other source elements include cultural and historical processes.17This essay draws upon Kline’s pluralist and materialist paradigms.Rather than argue whether Jackson’s Aragorn is a good or bad adaptation of Tolkien’s Aragorn, we consider these two texts in relation to eachother, analyzing how the novel and the film each construct a story. Justas Tolkien adapted elements of early medieval Germanic culture to themodern genre of the novel, Jackson adapted elements of Tolkien’s workfor the even more modern medium of film. We argue that changes inAragorn’s character made as a result of the adaptation to film shift theportrayal from an epic hero who, while knowing he must prove himselfto others, has no doubt about his ability to do so, to a more contemporary hero who doubts himself and must deal with those doubts over thecourse of the film. Some of these changes are needed to appeal to acontemporary audience who does not know Beowulf, epic conventions, or84Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reidpagan Germanic notions of kingship.This characterization may be more appealing than the original tosome in the contemporary audience although it would probably irritateTolkien and does irk some scholars. In her essay, “XXXXXXXX Art of the Story-Teller and the Person of the Hero,” Kayla McKinney Wiggins’ finaljudgment is that Jackson’s Aragorn is a “modern protagonist, smaller inscope and lesser in nature” than the epic Aragorn of Tolkien’s novel, claiming that the result is viewers cannot know the characters as well because“[w]e can’t know them with the fundamental recognition that is a partof our primal consciousness, the part of ourselves that reaches out tomyth, and folklore, and legend, as essential truth, as absolute identity”(121, our emphasis). Wiggins assumes the reality of a primal consciousness, a literary belief that most historians and that some literary scholars, especially those trained in most postmodern critical theories, wouldnot acknowledge. Contemporary critical theorists in history and literarystudies are equally uneasy with any claim of a “universal” archetype, orwith essential truths and identity, noting how such standards worked toexclude works of literature from different cultures and perspectives overthe decades. And finally, as Louis Menand notes in a fine review of thefilm which he saw in the company of a fourteen year old, what is universal for one generation is not for the next. Menand compares his youthfulreading of the novel in 1963 with his friend’s, noting that he read it as akind of historical novel, as opposed to the fantasy adventure understoodby a fourteen year old who had recently read the book and noted that agood deal of the film was from the book. Menand realized a reader whohad grown up with cultural references including Xena: Warrior Princess andcomputerized games is an entirely different reader than the one that hehad been in 1963. Our experiences teaching Tolkien in undergraduateand graduate courses, to students ranging from nineteen years old tosixty years old, as well as our experiences reading Tolkien over the courseof several decades and viewing Peter Jackson’s films multiple times, isthat, as Louis Menand realized, and as Tom Shippey says, there is now“another road” to Middle-earth, a road that acknowledges the existenceof multiple ideas of kingship, heroism, and truths, embodying them fordifferent readers. 18NOTES1 Gwendolyn A. Morgan also identifies the modern nature of Aragorn’s self-doubt in contrast to what she calls the “pseudo-medievalistNorthern courage” of the epic hero. Morgan’s chapter offers a lessfocused, more general discussion of Jackson’s translation, re-creation,and interpretation of Tolkien’s work than does this article; moreover,Morgan’s chapter concentrates the influence of XXXXXXXX Wizard of Oz on85Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards KingshipJackson’s film (Morgan 21-34).2 For example, see Burns, Flieger, and Nelson; and Chance and Siewers.3 XXXXXXXX historiography of the nature of pagan Germanic and early medieval medieval kingship has changed over time, and scholars todayare much less optimistic than their predecessors of the mid-twentiethcentury about recovering Germanic culture as it existed prior to Roman contact because it was communicated through intermediaries,such as Tacitus, who were hardly disinterested observers. NormanCantor’s Inventing the Middle Ages describes the ideas of the most influential medievalists of the twentieth century, including the conceptsof medieval kingship put forth by Percy Schramm and Ernst Kantorowicz as a combination of Christian and Roman influence with aheroic tradition of Germanic kings exemplified in the poem Beowulf,as well as Marc Bloch’s work on the royal touch (79-117, 140). XXXXXXXX“sacral kingship” thesis would have been widely acknowledged during Tolkien’s time. For descriptions of this understanding of kingship,see Chaney, Myers & Wolfram, Leyser and Zacour.4 XXXXXXXX wording in Appendix A of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings leaves no doubtof Melian’s divinity: “Lúthien Tinúviel was the daughter of KingThingol Grey-cloak of Doriath in the First Age, but her mother wasMelian of the people of the Valar” (RK, VI, A, 314). XXXXXXXX marriage ofThingol and Melian occupies a chapter in Tolkien’s XXXXXXXX Silmarillion.5 Beren and Lúthien also have their own chapter in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion.6 Kollmann’s extensive essay focuses on a primarily descriptive comparison of all major council scenes in book and film, and on how thepacing of the film downplays and changes the importance of counselas well as councils. We do not disagree with her readings of book andfilm for the most part. Her work focuses primarily on analyzing differences between the two works without evaluating the film directlyalthough some of her language at times indicates an assumption thatthe changes in the film lessen the impact of the councils and theme ofcounsel and communal wisdom. Her concluding argument concerning the changes in Aragorn focuses on the shift from Tolkien’s moremasculine Aragorn, needing to be complemented by the feminineArwen, to the nature of Peter Jackson’s Aragorn who is balancedwithin himself, having both masculine and feminine characteristics.7 Scene numbers and titles are from the Extended Editions.8 Aragorn expresses some uncertainty about their route when speaking86Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne Reidto Gandalf in “XXXXXXXX Ring Goes South,” discussing whether to attempt the Redhorn Gate or go by way of Moria (FR, II, iii, 300-1). He is also uncertain about what is best to do after the Companyleaves Lothlórien: his original plan to accompany Boromir to MinasTirith has been changed by the death of Gandalf, and he is unable todirect Frodo or the others to make a clear decision (FR, II, viii, 383).Most strongly, in “XXXXXXXX Departure of Boromir,” at the start of XXXXXXXXTwo Towers, he believes “an ill fate is on [him] this day,” (TT, III, i, 3)leading him to make ill decisions, and Boromir’s death leads him tofeel that he has failed, and he does not know what to do (TT, III, i,15). XXXXXXXXse doubts have more to do with Tolkien’s exploration of theinterplay of free will and fate than with the theme of kingship. AfterBoromir’s burial and the elegy, Aragorn is able to make the decisionto take the remaining members of the company to rescue Merry andPippin, instead of following Frodo and Sam (TT, III, i, 21).9 Within film studies, the canonical text is the theatrical version. Arguably, the scene at the grave was cut because Aragorn’s refusal toaccept the sword, and the power of the kingship, was established inthe scenes between Gandalf and Elrond, and between Aragorn andArwen. Our work on the film draws from both releases, and on occasion makes use of the Special Features as well, just as our work onTolkien’s novel draws from other publications relating to the novel,including his letters and the History of Middle-earth volumes edited byChristopher Tolkien.10 Aragorn was from the line of kings of the northern kingdom, Arnor,who were the only descendents left from the Númenorian kings afterthe death of King Eärnur of Gondor (RK, Appendix A, 348). XXXXXXXXdebate over the legitimacy of the line of Northern kinds to rule inGondor is detailed in Appendix A. Arguably, the decline of Gondor under the later Stewards, especially Denethor, and the increasingthreat of Sauron, and Aragorn’s deeds lead the people of Gondor toreconsider that earlier rejection.11 Tom Shippey, in the second chapter of J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of theCentury, rightly argues that the Council of Elrond chapter is a “largeunappreciated linguistic tour de force, whose success may be gauged bythe fact that few pause to recognize its complexity” (68).12 XXXXXXXX most notable of these shifts is the movement of much of thehistory and background of the Ring being shifted from Gandalf inthe Council scene to Galadriel in the voice-over at the start of thefirst film. Since Tolkien wished to include parts of what later becameXXXXXXXX Silmarillion with XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings so that this extremely long87Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards Kingshipexpository scene need not be included in the novel, the writers’ anddirector’s decision to move the key information, along with Bilbo’sfinding of the Ring in Gollum’s cave, into a “prelude” makes perfectsense. In Letter 131 to Milton Waldman, written to argue that someof the mythic and historical material such as “XXXXXXXX Silmarilllion” andXXXXXXXX Downfall of Númenor, should be published with the novel whichwould allow the cutting of “much explanation of background, andespecially that found in the Council of Elrond (Bk II)” (Letters 161).13 XXXXXXXX long description of Gandalf ’s imprisonment by Saruman andhis escape is shown directly, in the main film narrative and in a flashback when Gandalf is speaking to Frodo when he wakes14 We agree with Morgan’s argument that the changes in Jackson’s filmadd up to a more secularized text than Tolkien’s novel.15 Some critics see Boromir as being given the function reserved forFaramir in the novel, of being the first to recognize Aragorn as king.XXXXXXXX changes in Faramir’s character and the effects on the structureand themes need to be the subject of a separate essay.16 See, for example Chance, “Is there a Text in this Hobbit?” and “Tolkien’s Women (And Men): XXXXXXXX Films and the Book.”; Bratman, Croft“Mithril Coats,”; Wiggins, and Timmons. More positive evaluationsinclude Mallinson, Paxson, Akers-Jordan, Gaydosik, and Thum. Allbut two of the scholars of the essays in the Mythopoeic Society anthology edited by Janet Brennan Croft are literature or compositionscholars or librarians. One scholar is trained in film studies; a secondis working from a religious studies method. Tom Shippey, a philologist who served as an advisor for the film, presents a nuanced argument concerning important thematic shifts in the film while arguingthat his reading is that of someone who prefers the book, in “AnotherRoad to Middle-earth.”17 Film scholars do not necessarily consider knowledge of the book thatis the source of a film to be important, as J. E. Smyth’s essay, “XXXXXXXXThree Ages of Imperial Cinema from the Death of Gordon to XXXXXXXXReturn of the King” demonstrates. Smyth is interested in how Jackson’sfilm fits within the ideology of imperialism in film and does not mention the book. Sue Kim’s “Beyond Black and White: Race and Postmodernism in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings Films” analyzes racial coding inthe film, considering the racial constructions in Tolkien’s novel, butthen moves to an analysis of the impact of the films on the economyand social structures of New Zealand.18 “Another Road to Middle-earth.”88Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne ReidWORKS CITEDAkers-Jordan, Cathy. “Fairy Princess or Tragic Heroine? XXXXXXXX Metamorphosis of Arwen Undómiel in Peter Jackson’s XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings Films.” In Croft: 195-214.Bratman, David. “Summa Jacksonica: A Reply to Defenses of Peter Jackson’s XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings Films, After St. Thomas Aquinas.” InCroft: 27-62.Burns, Marjorie. Perilous Realms: Celtic and Norse in Tolkien’s Middle-earth.Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2005.Cantor, Norman F. Inventing the Middle Ages. XXXXXXXX Lives, Works, and Ideas ofthe Great Medievalists of the Twentieth Century. New York: WilliamMorrow, 1991.Chance, Jane. “Is there a Text in this Hobbit? Peter Jackson’s Fellowshipof the Ring.” Literature Film Quarterly 30.2 (2002): 79-85.———. “Tolkien’s Women (And Men): XXXXXXXX Films and the Book.” InCroft: 175-194.——— and Alfred K. Siewers, eds. Tolkien’s Modern Middle Ages New York:Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.Chaney, William A. XXXXXXXX Cult of Kingship in Anglo-Saxon England: XXXXXXXX Transition from Paganism to Christianity. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1970.Croft, Janet Brennan. “Mithril Coats and Tin Ears: ‘Anticipation’ and‘Flattening’ in Peter Jackson’s XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings Trilogy.” InCroft: 63-80.———, ed. Tolkien on Film: Essays on Peter Jackson’s XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings.Altadena, CA: XXXXXXXX Mythopoeic Press, 2004.Flieger, Verlyn. “Frodo and Aragorn: XXXXXXXX Concept of the Hero.” In Tolkien: New Critical Perspectives, ed. Neil D. Isaacs and Rose A. Zimbardo. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1981: 40-62.Gaydosik, Victoria. “‘Crimes Against the Book’? XXXXXXXX Transformation ofTolkien’s Arwen from Page to Screen and the Abandonment ofthe Psyche Archetype.” In Croft: 215-230.Kim, Sue. “Beyond Black and White: Race and Postmodernism in XXXXXXXXLord of the Rings Films.” Mfs: Modern Fiction Studies 50.4 (Winter2004): 875-907.89Councils and Kings: Aragorn’s Journey Towards KingshipKline, Karen E. “XXXXXXXX Accidental Tourist on Page and on Screen: Interrogating Normative XXXXXXXXories about Film Adaptation.” LiteratureFilm Quarterly 24.1 (1996): 70-83.Kollmann, Judith. “Elisions and Ellipses: Counsel and Council in Tolkien’s and Jackson’s XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings.” In Croft: 149-171.Leyser, K. J. Rule and Conflict in an Early Medieval Society. Oxford: BasilBlackwell, 1989.XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings. XXXXXXXXatrical and Extended Editions. Dir. Peter Jackson. New Line. 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004.Mallinson, Jeffrey. “A Potion too Strong?: Challenges in Translating theReligious Significance of Tolkien’s XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings to Film.”In Journal of Religion and Popular Culture 1 (Spring 2002). Electronic publication: <http://www.usask.ca/relst/jrpc/articletolkien.html>.Menand, Louis. “Goblin Market.” New York Review of Books 49, no. 1 (Jan.17, 2002): 8-9.Myers, Henry A. and Herwig Wolfram. Medieval Kingship. Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1982.Morgan, Gwendylyn A. “I Don’t Think We’re in Kansas Anymore: PeterJackson’s Film Interpretation of Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings.”In Fantasy Fiction Into Film: Essays, ed. Leslie Stratyner and JamesR. Keller. Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2007: 21-34.Nelson, Charles W. “XXXXXXXX Sins of Middle-Earth: Tolkien’s Use of Medieval Allegory.” In J.R.R. Tolkien and His Literary Resonances: View ofMiddle-earth, eds. George Clark and Daniel Timmons. Westport,CT: Greenwood Press, 2000: 83-94.Paxson, Diana. “Re-vision: XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings in Print and on Screen.”In Croft: 81-102.Shippey, Tom. “Another Road to Middle-earth: Jackson’s Movie Trilogy.” In Understanding “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings”: XXXXXXXX Best of TolkienCriticism,” ed. Rose A. Zimbardo and Neil D. Isaacs. Boston:Houghton Mifflin, 2004: 233-54.———. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,2002.———. XXXXXXXX Road to Middle-earth: How J.R.R. Tolkien Created a New Mythology. Revised and Expanded Edition. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,2003.90Judy Ann Ford and Robin Anne ReidSmyth, J.E. “XXXXXXXX Three Ages of Imperial Cinema from the Death ofGordon to XXXXXXXX Return of the King.” In Croft: 3-23.Thum, Maureen. “XXXXXXXX ‘SubSubcreation’ of Galadriel, Arwen, andÉowyn: Women of Power in Tolkien’s and Jackson’s XXXXXXXX Lord ofthe Rings.” In Croft: 231-256.Timmons, Daniel. “Frodo on Film: Peter Jackson’s Problematic Portrayal. “ In Croft: 123-148.Wiggins, Kayla McKinney. “XXXXXXXX Art of the Story-Teller and the Personof the Hero.” In Croft: 103-122.Zacour, Norman. An Introduction to Medieval Institutions. 2nd ed. New York:St. Martin’s Press, 1976.91Copyright © West Virginia University PressXXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees inXXXXXXXX Lord of the RingsCYNTHIA M. COHENWhen 1955), it became the first literary work to portray tree-like beings XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings was originally published (in 1954 andas ontologically distinct from regular trees. Before XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsand during Tolkien’s lifetime, other authors who had imagined trees thatdid not behave or appear like trees of the Primary World had conceivedof these creatures simply as trees—strange, extraordinary, malicious, orfriendly trees—and they perceived no need to further distinguish them.For the purposes of this article, literary trees are divided into four categories: (1) trees that do nothing unusual, appearing essentially as PrimaryWorld trees; (2) trees that remain rooted in the ground but are able totalk, think, and/or feel; (3) trees that remain rooted but can move theirbranches or trunks as trees of the Primary World cannot; and (4) treesthat can uproot themselves, physically moving from one place to another.XXXXXXXXse categories are augmentations: trees in all categories but the firstcan talk, think, and/or feel; and trees in the fourth category can movetheir branches or trunks as well as relocate themselves. When these categories are applied to XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, Ents and Huorns fall into thefourth category, Old Man Willow belongs in the third, trees of the OldForest and Fangorn Forest fall into the second or first categories (althoughmost readers assume they belong in the third or fourth), and the remainder of trees in the text belong in the first. As this article will demonstrate,Tolkien distinguishes trees of the fourth category from all others; he implies but does not confirm that trees of the third category are somethingother than trees; and he seems to accept that trees of the second categorycan convincingly be called “trees.” XXXXXXXX following survey of texts writtenbefore or contemporaneously with XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings—texts that contain trees of the third and fourth categories—reveals the originality ofTolkien’s consideration of such trees as ontologically distinct.I. XXXXXXXX Uniqueness of Tolkien’s MethodTrees of the third and fourth categories often appear in literature astrees upon which human characteristics have been projected. This canbe partly attributed to morphological similarities: for instance, humansand trees both have trunks, limbs, and crowns, in roughly comparablelocations, and both typically stand upright. Another explanation, Tolkien suggests, is that people wish to associate or communicate with other92Cynthia M. Cohenliving things (MC 152), expressed by G. K. Chesterton in a legend of theBarbary Coast (1922):St Securis . . . grew to love [trees] like companions. . . . Andhe prayed that they might be loosened from time to time towalk like other things. And the trees were moved upon theprayers of Securis. . . . XXXXXXXX men of the desert . . . [saw] thesaint walking with a walking grove. (58)Chesterton portrays these trees as trees—trees that physically move asPrimary World trees cannot, but trees all the same—illustrating the keydifference between Tolkien and every other author surveyed here. Whereother authors saw no need to ascribe words other than “tree” (or familiarspecies names of the Primary World) to tree-like creatures that did notact like actual trees, Tolkien opted for linguistic distinctions that wouldcomplement his literary descriptions. In XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, the words“Ent” and “Huorn” signal ontological differences from trees; other authors made no such distinction.David Lindsay and Ludvig Holberg, for example, both wrote abouttrees of the fourth category. An unusual creature—at first glance simply“a great tree floating in the water . . . upright, and alive”—appears inLindsay’s A Voyage to Arcturus (1920), a book that Tolkien read “with avidity” (Lindsay 187; Letters 34). Maskull discovers that the crown “actuallywas a sort of head, for there were membranes like rudimentary eyes”;he realizes that he can ride this tree, directing it through watercoursesby covering up some of the “eyes” (Lindsay 188). Though once referredto as “the huge plant-animal,” the creature is otherwise called a “tree.”Similarly, the ambulatory trees that populate Holberg’s XXXXXXXX Journey ofNiels Klim to the World Underground (1742) are called “trees” and identifiedas familiar species (49, 85). Curiously, these trees have strikingly unarboreal features: “on the top of the trunks or bodies of the trees their headswere placed, not at all unlike human heads; and instead of roots, [theyhad] two feet” (Holberg 19). XXXXXXXX cypresses, in particular, display varyingeye shapes (oval or square), numbers (from one to four), and locations(forehead or back of the head) (Holberg 85). Neither these eyes nor theother unarboreal features seem to justify a new class of being—Holberg(like Lindsay) merely describes a very strange sort of tree.Extraordinary trees also appear in two works by George MacDonald.XXXXXXXX Golden Key (1867)1 contains a scene reminiscent of Tolkien’s hobbits encountering Old Man Willow in the Old Forest. A child in thisstory encounters a tree that, though it moves of its own accord, is stillconceived of simply as a tree: “It dropped its branches to the ground allabout her, and caught her as in a trap” (MacDonald, Key 14). Phantastes(1858), on the other hand, offers a more complex association of sentient,93XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsambulatory trees identified by species (7). Anodos describes the Ash asa creature of terrible and changing light, with an especially disturbingface (MacDonald, Phantastes 21–22). Anodos relates that the Ash “benthis Gorgon-head, and entered the cave . . . He drew near me . . . Hecame stooping, like a beast of prey”; the Ash then retreats and disappears(MacDonald, Phantastes 39–40). Although they clearly fall into the fourthcategory of literary trees, MacDonald’s ambulatory trees are not distinguished by name from trees that remain rooted.A similar portrayal of ambulatory trees can be found in XXXXXXXX Chronicles of Narnia series by C. S. Lewis, who considered Phantastes a “greatliterary experience” and “a major influence upon his thought and work”(Lewis, W. H., and Hooper 47, 322). In XXXXXXXX Magician’s Nephew (1955, Book1 according to internal chronology), Aslan first awakens the trees, together with other natural elements. Aslan commands them to “be walkingtrees” and tells the Oak, “Come hither to me” (Lewis, C. S., Magician’s126, 130). Trees are not seen walking again in Narnia until Prince Caspian(1951, Book 4 according to internal chronology), when they are neededto fight the Telmarines. While Lewis may have been influenced here byTolkien, their execution differs: Tolkien not only distinguishes betweentrees and Ents (where Lewis only describes trees—“Awakened Trees”),Tolkien further distinguishes Huorns (who travel to Helm’s Deep but remain rooted during the battle, while Ents are consistently ambulatory).Lewis’s relocated forest is entirely ambulatory: “Instead of being fixedto one place, [imagine it] was rushing at you; and was no longer treesbut huge people; yet still like trees because their long arms waved likebranches and their heads tossed” (Lewis, C. S., Prince 196). Implying thatthese trees are like people, Lewis takes a tentative step toward a new ontological class, but he retracts this perspective by the novel’s end, wherethese beings are once called “the tree people” but otherwise are called“trees” (Lewis, C. S., Prince 210–12). Conversely, Tolkien’s cultural descriptions in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings emphasize the human side of Ents,building narrative depth that makes his own representation credible.Lewis also once refers to animated trees as dryads and hamadryads,using the terms somewhat interchangeably, while Greek mythology distinguishes the two: each type of being maintains an identity unequivocally distinct from the trees with which they associate, but while a dryad maymove freely among the trees and groves where she lives, a hamadryad isphysically and emotionally bound to a particular tree (Lewis, C. S., Prince117–18; Porteous 115). XXXXXXXX Classical tradition also includes a notableexample of trees moving in ways that Primary World trees cannot. Oviddescribes Orpheus, who sits atop a hill and attracts a host of trees byplaying irresistible music (Simpson 167). Ovid’s long, annotated specieslist describes some species (poplar, laurel, umbrella pine, and cypress)94Cynthia M. Cohendrawn from other Classical myths where people are transformed intotrees, yet most of the featured species have no such derivations. This isan example of the tree-lists (or tree catalogues) in Classical and medievalpoetry. Although tree-lists appear in the works of Seneca, Lucan, Statius,Claudian, Boccaccio, Chaucer, Virgil, and others, only Ovid describesthe trees of his list as ambulatory (Root 19; Boitani 28). Even so, Oviddoes not distinguish his myriad ambulatory species from the stationarytrees of the real world.Trees with human characteristics can also be found in the Old Welshpoem “Cad Goddeu,” attributed to Taliesin, where trees are transformedinto warriors (Jones 65). Taliesin names various familiar tree species andenumerates their military deeds; for example, “Fine hawthorn delivered pain,” and “Pear worked oppression on the battlefield” (Ford 185).Marged Haycock recognizes clichés of heroic poetry in Taliesin’s descriptions, citing the traditional Welsh practice of metaphorically describingkings and warriors in terms of trees and architecture, using words such as“tree, column, post, prop, beam, [and] roofbeam” (302–04). While “CadGoddeu” may have inspired Tolkien in much the same way as Shakespeare’s Birnam wood—sparking his desire for trees to defend themselvesin battle—the poem provides no verisimilitude, revealing no attempt topresent a Secondary World that is convincing to the reader (Letters 212 n).Neither Shakespeare nor Taliesin considers that, if trees could march atall, they would no longer be recognizable as familiar trees of our world.XXXXXXXX graphical representation of literary trees must also be considered, as illustrations can affect how a reader apprehends the text. ArthurRackham, a prime example in the context of this discussion, was perhapsbest known for producing images of trees with human attributes (Hamilton 13).2 Rackham’s credits include Fairy Tales of the Brothers Grimm (1900and 1909), Shakespeare’s Macbeth (1908) and XXXXXXXX Tempest (1926), CharlesS. Evans’s XXXXXXXX Sleeping Beauty (1920), Milton’s Comus (1921), Hans Christian Andersen’s Fairy Tales (1932), and Kenneth Grahame’s XXXXXXXX Wind inthe Willows (1940), all of which offered Rackham the opportunity—withthreatening or enchanted woods, trees that speak or are otherwise conscious, or spirits trapped in trees—to draw anthropomorphic trees (Hamilton 185–86). Although Rackham’s illustrations appear in no text featuring trees of the third or fourth categories (i.e., trees that physically moveas Primary World trees cannot), his suggestions of arm-like branches,leg-like roots, and facial features on tree trunks influence how the treesin these stories have been received. While these trees speak, think, or exude an ominous aura without moving in ways that Primary World treescannot, the vivid corporeal texture of Rackham’s drawings make theoral, mental, and psychic faculties of these trees explicitly physical. Treesthat belonged—by their authors’ intentions—to the first and second95XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringscategories, function—through Rackham’s interpretation—as trees of thethird or fourth categories. XXXXXXXX result, however, is consistent with all othertexts here reviewed, as even the most anthropomorphically drawn treesare still considered trees.Another popular text to consider is XXXXXXXX Wonderful Wizard of Oz (1900)by L. Frank Baum. XXXXXXXX trees in this story belong to the third category:“Just as [the Scarecrow] came under the first branches they bent downand twined around him, and the next minute he was raised from theground and flung headlong among his fellow travellers.” XXXXXXXX Woodmanfares better with a practical, Primary World approach, demonstratingthat these “Fighting Trees” have the same weaknesses as real-world trees:“When a big branch bent down to seize him the Woodman chopped atit so fiercely that he cut it in two. At once the tree began shaking all itsbranches as if in pain.” Baum suggests that the trees can move becausethey have been “given [a] wonderful power,” demonstrating that Baumconceived of these beings as ordinary trees endowed with extraordinaryqualities (311–12).XXXXXXXX final example surveyed here is T. H. White’s XXXXXXXX Sword in theStone, which Tolkien read soon after it was published in 1938 (Scull andHammond, Reader’s Guide 818). In the “Dream of the Trees,” varioustree species engage in a long discussion; afterward, they dance: “theymoved their bodies but not their feet,” and they “rippled their twigs likeserpents, or made slow ritual gestures about their heads and bodies withthe larger boughs” (White 248). Like Holberg, MacDonald, and othersexplored in this article, White’s trees of the third category are consciousmanifestations of familiar tree species, differing only in that they occurwithin the framework of a dream—a construct that Tolkien deemed inappropriate to a fairy-story (MC 116).Lindsey, MacDonald, and Lewis aspired, as Tolkien did, to placetheir stories in a believable Secondary World; the authors of “Cad Goddeu” and the Classical story of Orpheus, conversely, had no interest inpreserving “the inner consistency of reality” (MC 138–40). While thetrees discussed here serve different narrative and symbolic functions incontext, the reader initially apprehends each through literal description,making some judgment—whether relevant to the story or not, whetherconscious or not—as to how realistic the scenario seems. ConsideringXXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings against the backdrop of these literary trees will emphasize how differently Tolkien portrays trees in his own work.II. Narrative Significance of Botanical CharacteristicsTolkien differs from the authors surveyed above not only by distinguishing between trees and tree-like beings but also by making first-category trees significant in the narrative. XXXXXXXX prominent place of trees96Cynthia M. Cohenin XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings is often identified solely with Ents, Huorns, andOld Man Willow—characters readers tend to describe as trees that canphysically defend themselves. Sharing the textual landscape with suchcaptivating creative inventions, Tolkien’s subtle weaving of the botanicalcharacteristics of familiar and fictional tree species into the narrative caneasily be missed. All trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings mirror the essential qualities of trees in the Primary World. Even the few that belong to Tolkien’sfictional species are built from the same “primary material” as familiarspecies: their trunks, leaves, branches, and roots invariably display colors,textures, shapes, and seasonal variations that can be found in the PrimaryWorld (MC 140).Familiar Tree Species of the Primary WorldXXXXXXXX first example of Tolkien’s literary use of botanical characteristicsoccurs soon after the newly assembled Fellowship leaves Rivendell: theyarrive at Hollin, a place whose history is recorded in its ancient hollytrees (FR, II, iii, 295). XXXXXXXX people of Hollin planted holly trees to denotethe boundaries of their land, as expressed in the place-names “Hollin”(extant in modern-day England) and “Eregion” (Tolkien’s word, glossedas “holly-region”) (FR, II, iv, 316; Miles 159; Tolkien, “Nomenclature”772). Unique in Middle-earth’s history, Hollin is one of a very few placeswhere Elves and Dwarves interacted peacefully and productively (RK,Appendix B, 363). Tolkien captures this history using botanical qualitiescharacteristic of real-world holly trees when he describes the “grey-greentrunks [that] seemed to have been built out of the very stone of the hills,”grafting the Dwarves’ association with craftsmanship and stone upon theElvish affinity for trees and forests (FR, II, iii, 295; RK, Appendix F, I,410). Few tree species could have been employed for this purpose, butthe bark of holly—pale, grey, and “strangely smooth”; indeed, “quitedifferent from that of most other trees”—is well suited to the task (Morse22–24). By choosing a tree with bark resembling stone, Tolkien aptlyillustrates the cultural history of Hollin with unmodified “primary material.”Likening holly to stone lends permanence to something transient,reinforcing a key function of the “Three Rings of Power” created inHollin, which enable the bearer to “ward off the decays of time andpostpone the weariness of the world.” XXXXXXXX history of the One Ring alsobegins in Hollin (S 287–88). XXXXXXXX power and significance of this placeis captured in two individual holly trees at the western entrance to theMines of Moria:Close under the cliff there stood, still strong and living, twotall trees, larger than any trees of holly that Frodo had ever97XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsseen or imagined. . . . XXXXXXXXy towered overhead, stiff, dark, andsilent, standing like sentinel pillars at the end of the road.(FR, II, iv, 316)XXXXXXXX vast size of these trees reinforces the prominence of Hollin’s history,and their placement at the boundary of Elvish and Dwarvish lands recounts that unprecedented friendship. XXXXXXXX trees’ size, although unusual,is not unheard of in the Primary World. Though the common holly (Ilexaquifolium), a native evergreen tree common in Britain, is often found asan understory plant, ornamental shrub, or hedgerow tree—all forms ofgenerally small stature—it can grow up to fifty (and, rarely, seventy) feettall, if protected well and left undisturbed long enough (Miles 156).3 XXXXXXXXsize of the hollies outside Moria, therefore, can be attributed to potential Primary World circumstances; their extraordinary associations comefrom connections with Middle-earth’s fictional history.Later in the story, Tolkien once again weaves the botanical characteristics of Primary World trees into the narrative as Frodo, Sam, andGollum reach the Cross-roads of Ithilien en route to the Pass of CirithUngol:XXXXXXXXy became aware that these [trees] were of vast size,very ancient it seemed, and still towering high, though theirtops were gaunt and broken, as if tempest and lightning-blasthad swept across them, but had failed to kill them or to shaketheir fathomless roots. . . .At length they reached the trees, and found that theystood in a great roofless ring, open in the middle to the sombre sky; and the spaces between their immense boles werelike the great dark arches of some ruined hall. (TT, IV, vii,310–11)Many chapters prior, Elrond recounts Gondor’s history, describing Osgiliath straddling the Great River, Minas Ithil to the east, and Minas Anorto the west (FR, II, ii, 257). XXXXXXXXse landmarks of Gondor were linked byan east–west road, while a perpendicular road ran along the foothills ofthe Mountains of Shadow, joining northern Gondor to the port cities ofSouth Gondor. Over time, Gondor’s waning vigilance yielded the landscape to less-desirable inhabitants; Minas Ithil and Minas Anor becameMinas Morgul and Minas Tirith, engaged in constant warfare, and Osgiliath was deserted (FR, II, ii, 258). When Gondor was strong, the Crossroads linked places associated with prosperity and military victory; by thetime Frodo, Sam, and Gollum arrive there, the Cross-roads have come toconnect Minas Tirith, Gondor’s last stronghold, to threats, enemies, andreminders of failure: to the east, Minas Morgul, occupied by the enemiesof Men; to the north, the scene of the last great battle between the free98Cynthia M. Cohenpeoples of Middle-earth and Sauron’s forces; to the south, the disputedregion of South Gondor and the land of Harad, “a refuge for all the enemies of the king” (RK, Appendix A, I, iv, 327). To Gondor, lacking military strength and under constant threat from Mordor, the Cross-roadsare part of a failed infrastructure that once kept evil at bay.This degraded state is evoked by the dominant elements that Frodo,Sam, and Gollum encounter at the Cross-roads. An old stone statue of aking, its head broken off and mockingly replaced with a crudely paintedstone, sits among the trees; the visual parallel Tolkien draws betweenthe trees and this statue affords the trees a symbolic link to Gondor’shistory. XXXXXXXX statue demonstrates the current phase of Gondor’s leadership: a once great nation led by strong rulers, descendants in a line ofkings, has fallen into decay and lost its predestined leaders. XXXXXXXX imageof the statue, headless but still upright and bodily strong, is reinforced bythe surrounding vast, lofty trees with broken tops. Tolkien reasserts theconnection between the trees and Gondor’s failing leadership by describing the trees’ collective structure in terms of a ruined hall (TT, IV, vii,311). While the solidity of the tree trunks and the stone statue conveysGondor’s former strength, the shattered tree-tops and dislodged statue’shead plead discontinuity; though Gondor still exists—respectable, determined, steadfast, and rooted in this place—the suffering nation displaysthe wounds of war. Even broken, these icons are formidable, reflectinga crippled nation upheld by a strong and determined few: Boromir, Faramir, and, ultimately, Aragorn. XXXXXXXXse enduring trees, battered but stillalive, infuse the inert stone statue with their life force by virtue of proximity and similarity; the trees become identified with the statue, as theydo with the symbolism of the Cross-roads, gaining narrative significancewith no alteration of botanical characteristics.From a botanical perspective, Tolkien’s representation of the treesat the Cross-roads is thoroughly credible in the Primary World, thoughthey are not identified by species: the trees are characterized by greatheight and girth, seemingly great age, crown dieback (an arboriculturalphenomenon suggested by the broken tree-tops), and possible exposureto extreme weather. XXXXXXXXse characteristics, while insufficient for specificidentification, could apply to many tree species in the Primary World.Trees endure a lifetime of exposure to weather; not able to regenerateinjured tissue as animals and people can, trees incorporate wounds andbreaks into their physical structure. While crown dieback often indicates a serious, potentially fatal problem, such as infectious disease orinadequate water transport in the tree (e.g., due to root damage or soilproblems), it may also be a natural response mechanism (Costello et al.25–26; Rane and Pataky 77–78). An ancient tree, for example, is likely todemonstrate crown dieback during the “Veteran stage” of growth, when99XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsthe general branch structure has already been achieved but the tree continues to gradually increase in girth. Because a tree obtains its food fromits leaves, the loss of a large branch (and its leaves) hampers a tree’s abilityto feed itself. If a major branch is lost, the tree may respond by allowingother branches to die in order to sustain the rest of the tree:This does not mean that the tree is about to die, it is a condition that can persist for many decades or even centuries. . . .XXXXXXXX response of the tree results in a new balance betweenthe area of woody material and that of the leaves. (Read28–29)Thus the “gaunt and broken” tops of the Cross-roads trees are consistentwith ancient trees in the Primary World. This arboricultural understanding forges another connection with the headless statue: the head, separated from its body, is ringed with delicate plants resembling a small silverand gold crown. Frodo draws hope from this sight and exclaims, “XXXXXXXXycannot conquer for ever!” (TT, IV, vii, 311). Just as an ancient tree’s deadupper branches do not necessarily indicate impending death, the presentsigns of Gondor’s decline will not dictate the future of the nation.Fictional Tree Species in XXXXXXXX Lord of the RingsXXXXXXXX White Tree of Gondor represents the deeper history of Men inTolkien’s Secondary World, reaching back to the Two Trees of Valinor:Telperion had dark green leaves that “beneath were as shining silver,” andLaurelin had gold-edged leaves “of a young green like the new-openedbeech” and clusters of yellow, horn-shaped flowers (S 38). Telperion becomes known as the “White Tree” or the “Silver Tree”; Laurelin is generally called “the Golden.”4 Yavanna’s gift, to the Elves in Tirion uponTúna, of Telperion’s first descendant marks the first link in the WhiteTree’s chain of relation; named Galathilion, this tree was “a lesser imageof Telperion” that did not bear light (S 59). Celeborn, propagated fromGalathilion, flourishes in Tol Eressëa.Telperion’s descendants develop greater significance once the original White Tree in Valinor is destroyed (S 76). In Númenor, the WhiteTree starts to function as an indicator of the health of the kingship. Nú-menor’s White Tree, a seedling of Celeborn received from the Elves,is named Nimloth, planted in the King’s court, and respectfully tended(S 259–63). Under Ar-Gimilzôr, the White Tree goes untended and declines, but his successor, Tar-Palantir, honors the White Tree and prophesies that the line of Kings will end when the White Tree dies. XXXXXXXX thronepasses to Ar-Pharazôn who worships Melkor, defies the Ban of the Valar,and consents to cut down the White Tree (S 266–72). Before Númenor100Cynthia M. Cohenis destroyed, Isildur smuggles Nimloth’s seedling to Middle-earth (S276–80; RK, Appendix A, I, i, 317). For the first time, the White Tree isplanted in Gondor when Isildur settles at Minas Ithil (S 291–92).XXXXXXXX White Tree of Gondor’s health, though symbolically tied to thekingship throughout the history of Men, is not systematically affected bythe strength of Gondor’s leadership. Sauron kills Nimloth’s first scion inMiddle-earth after one hundred years. Twelve years later, Isildur claimsthe One Ring. Two years later, Isildur plants a seedling of the WhiteTree at Minas Anor (Minas Tirith) and is slain within the year. ThatWhite Tree lives 1,634 years, dying during XXXXXXXX Great Plague that alsokills the king and his children. An heir to the throne is found, and aWhite Tree seedling is planted four years after the Plague. XXXXXXXX death ofthe last White Tree, however—that which stands dead during XXXXXXXX Lordof the Rings—threatens to fulfill Tar-Palantir’s prophecy (RK, AppendixB, 365–69). At the time of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, the tree has stood deadin the citadel of Minas Tirith for one hundred sixty-six years, and theWhite Tree of Gondor comes to represent Gondor’s waning power andlack of a king.Yet in the minds of Tolkien’s characters, the image of the White Treeof Gondor repeatedly emerges as a symbol of Gondor’s strength. Pippin hears Gandalf sing about “Seven stars and seven stones / And onewhite tree,” and Gollum recalls “tales out of the South . . . about thesilver crown of [the] King and his White Tree” (TT, III, xi, 202; TT, IV,iii, 249). Faramir holds the White Tree as a symbol of hope, wishing to“see the White Tree in flower again in the courts of the kings, and theSilver Crown return, and Minas Tirith in peace” (TT, IV, v, 280). Duringmost of his lifetime, Faramir knows the actual White Tree only in death:a stark, skeletal reminder of the progressive failure of his people. Yet theimage of the living White Tree is constantly reinforced in Gondor as asymbol of national identity, prompting the persistent memory of Gondor’s former strength and the potential promise of the nation’s future. InMinas Tirith, Pippin sees the White Tree embroidered upon a uniformthat he soon will be wearing, and he first meets Denethor under a virtual shadow of the White Tree: Denethor’s chair sits beneath an emptythrone, behind which a jeweled image of a flowering tree is carved uponthe wall, reinforcing the connection between the ongoing crisis of leadership in Gondor and the lack of a living White Tree (RK, V, i, 25–26).To represent the hope of renewed strength in Gondor, the WhiteTree need not function outside the normal parameters of familiar Primary World trees. While replacement by a sapling of the same speciesdesignates the White Tree incapable of resurrection, the tree’s mortalityis notable in light of an analogous Christian legend that Tolkien wouldhave known. XXXXXXXX White Tree of Gondor distinctly parallels the Dry Tree101XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsdescribed in XXXXXXXX Travels of Sir John Mandeville (Mandeville’s Travels), whichpresumably died when Christ died; it was said that the tree would liveagain once “a great lord from the western part of the world [conquered]the Holy Land with the help of Christian folk” (Moseley 74). XXXXXXXX image of a dead tree replaced by a live one, as the White Tree of Gondoris, upholds the metaphor of resurrection and enables Tolkien to drawan implicit connection between Aragorn and Christ without suggestinganything botanically extraordinary about the tree.XXXXXXXX White Tree of Gondor’s botanical details are finally revealedas Aragorn prepares to assume the kingship, confirming that this treeis built from botanical details of Primary World trees. Aragorn finds asapling with “leaves long and shapely, dark above and silver beneath,”bearing one small cluster of white flowers (RK, VI, v, 250). XXXXXXXX shapeand color of the leaves recall the white willow (Salix alba), abundant inEngland, which has silky, white hairs on the underside of the leaf (Morse67). XXXXXXXX same colors are also found in England on white poplar (Populusalba), with shiny leaves that are dark grey-green on one side and silverywhite on the other, and on common whitebeam (Sorbus aria), which retains “startlingly white-woolly” hairs on the underside of the leaf (Morse66; Johnson and More 150, 292). Common whitebeam has clustered,white flowers characteristic of several species in the rose family (Rosaceae)5 (such as wild cherry [Prunus avium], common and midland hawthorn[Crataegus monogyna, C. laevigata], and common rowan [Sorbus aucuparia], allnative to England), any of which Tolkien might have used as a model forthe White Tree’s flowers (Edlin 58; Johnson and More 284, 300, 322–23;Rackham, Ancient Woodland 351–56). XXXXXXXX most extraordinary featureof the White Tree of Gondor—that it must have germinated from aseed planted at least one hundred sixty-six years before Aragorn discovers the sapling—also has analogues in the Primary World: lotus seedshave germinated after over one thousand years, and Arctic tundra lupine seeds have germinated after an estimated ten thousand years (Stern138).6 XXXXXXXXse seeds germinated after a period of dormancy, a processthat prevents a seed from sprouting in an environment where conditionsare likely to inhibit survival (Stern 198). Low temperatures, like thoselikely to occur on Mount Mindolluin, may cause dormancy (Schopmeyer26–28). XXXXXXXX White Tree of Gondor, whose seed remains dormant underharsh conditions in a remote location and germinates after a long periodof time, is drawn from real characteristics of Primary World trees.Without exceeding botanical accuracy, the symbolic associations ofthe White Tree of Gondor connect the kingdom’s history with its present and future. Upon seeing Gondor’s White Mountains, Aragorn recites: “West Wind blew there; the light upon the Silver Tree / Fell likebright rain in gardens in the Kings of old,” reinforcing the thematic link102Cynthia M. Cohenbetween Telperion, the White Tree (or Silver Tree) of Valinor, and theWhite Tree of Gondor (TT, III, ii, 25). XXXXXXXX interchangeability of “SilverTree” and “White Tree” destabilizes the time and place Aragorn refersto. Overlaying Gondorian imagery with allusions to the Blessed Realm—“West Wind” and “Silver Tree” associated with light falling “like brightrain”—this poem demonstrates the continuum of time described by theWhite Tree’s lineage, which itself echoes the lineage of the kings whotend and replace it. Perpetuating Telperion’s line is a royal responsibility, as the tree’s survival relies utterly upon the diligence of the survivingkings: “though the fruit of the Tree comes seldom to ripeness, yet the lifewithin may lie sleeping through many long years . . . if ever a fruit ripens,it should be planted, lest the line die out of the world” (RK, VI, v, 250).While the White Tree of Gondor describes the linear history of Men,Lothlórien’s mallorn trees seem not to experience the passage of time atall. Also not native to Middle-earth, this fictional species descends fromtrees known first on Tol Eressëa and subsequently on Númenor. Whenmallorn fruits given to Gil-galad by Tar-Aldarion did not take root inLindon, Gil-galad gave seeds to Galadriel “and under her power theygrew and flourished in the guarded land of Lothlórien” (UT 168). Legolas provides the first description of these trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings:In the autumn their leaves fall not, but turn to gold. Not tillthe spring comes and the new green opens do they fall, andthen the boughs are laden with yellow flowers; and the floorof the wood is golden, and golden is the roof, and its pillarsare of silver, for the bark of the trees is smooth and grey. (FR,II, vi, 349)Tolkien provides more detail in Unfinished Tales and confirms that mallorntrees are modeled upon familiar Primary World species:Its boughs [were] somewhat upswept after the manner of thebeech; but it never grew save with a single trunk. Its leaves,like those of the beech but greater, were pale green aboveand beneath were silver . . . it bore golden blossom in clusterslike a cherry. (UT 167–68)XXXXXXXX mallorn seed is described as “a small nut with a silver shale” (RK,VI, ix, 302). Beth Russell remarks upon the mallorn’s flower–fruit combination, atypical of Primary World trees: “most nut-bearing trees havetiny wind-pollinated flowers, whereas trees that produce large, colorfulflowers are animal-pollinated and have their seeds contained in variouskinds of [fleshy] fruits but not in nuts” (22). Although the mallorn asa composite resembles no known Primary World tree, each individualbotanical detail of the mallorn can be found in some familiar species.103XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the RingsMallorn most resembles the Primary World beech, whose spring foliageemerges as “emerald leaves clothed in silver down”; like the mallorn,the leaves that change color in autumn may remain on the tree untilspring (Edlin 15). Leaves of common beech (Fagus sylvatica) turn copperand then brown; Oriental beech (F. orientalis) leaves turn a rich yellow(Campbell-Culver 83–84). Beech trees are known for having giant trunkscovered by smooth, grey bark, and beeches growing near one another ina group are likely to grow tall and have straight trunks (Sutton 68; Miles80). Mallorn flowers mimic the clustering habit of cherry blossoms butnot the color, as cherry flowers are rarely yellow; even so, yellow flowersoccur on several Primary World trees found in England such as commonlime (Tilia × vulgaris), common laburnum (Laburnum anagyroides), and thegolden-rain tree (Koelreuteria paniculata) (Johnson and More 328; Sutton156, 130).XXXXXXXX Primary World features contributing to the mallorn’s form drawsymbolism from creative associations of “primary material” with othernarrative elements. XXXXXXXX smooth, grey bark and gold-colored leaves allowLegolas to describe Lothlórien in terms of a magnificent hall adornedwith precious metals, conveying a landscape of immense value (FR, II,vi, 349). Trees resembling precious metals recall the dream landscape ofPearl, where leaves “did as burnished silver slide / That thick upon twigsthere trembling grew,” tangentially connecting Lothlórien to the literarytradition of the Earthly Paradise (Tolkien 91; Patch 149–50). Silver andgold reflect Lothlórien’s community leaders by mirroring the colors ofCeleborn and Galadriel’s hair, and also recall the Two Trees of Valinor(FR, II, vii, 369).Like the mallorn’s botanical details, the overall shape of each mallorn tree contributes to the narrative. By supporting Lothlórien’s dominant architectural form, mallorn structure provides the literal, physicalfoundation for Lothlórien’s cultural landscape: the branches first growingoutward, then upward, and the “the main stem [near the top] dividedinto a crown of many boughs” allow for the building of flets (FR, II, vi,357). XXXXXXXX direction of branch growth recalls (but does not mirror) thecedar of Lebanon (Cedrus libani), and the divided main stem displays atypical Primary World growth response to a dead, removed, or damagedterminal bud (Howard 39–40; Harris, Clark, and Matheny 15). Just asthe mallorn’s botanical morphology combines details of different Primary World trees, the mallorn’s branch structure incorporates potentialgrowth forms of various trees under various conditions, not specificallycorresponding to any individual species but generally observable in thePrimary World.Some typical patterns of tree development, however, are disrupted inthis place. At his first sight of Lothlórien, Frodo observes that “no blemish104Cynthia M. Cohenor sickness or deformity could be seen in anything that grew upon theearth” (FR, II, vi, 365). Yet no tree in the Primary World, exposed toweather, other organisms, and time, maintains any degree of perfection.Trees can isolate areas of wounding and injury through a process calledcompartmentalization, which allows trees to survive and thrive even asparts of them continue to decay (Harris, Clark, and Matheny 34–35).XXXXXXXX absence of decay in Lothlórien is due to the Ring of Power thatGaladriel wears, not to any extraordinary immunity of the mallorn trees:this ring “[preserves] what is desired or loved, or its semblance” (Letters152). In this unnatural state of perfection, the mallorn trees reflect theresidents of Lothlórien, who are immune to disease and decay.As symbols of community identity, alive and present in daily life,mallorn trees are more real and immediate for the Elves of Lothlórienthan is the similarly functioning White Tree in Gondor. Tolkien wrotethat “Lothlórien is beautiful because there the trees [are] loved,” implying that the relationship between Elves and mallorn trees is morethan close—it is symbiotic (Letters 419). For residents of Lothlórien, thetrees are a metonym for their notion of home. Haldir is distressed by thethought of leaving for Valinor; he says that “it would be a poor life in aland where no mallorn grew” (FR, II, vi, 363). Galadriel poignantly refersto the Undying Lands:I sang of leaves, of leaves of gold, and leaves of gold there grew:Of wind I sang, a wind there came and in the branches blew.Beyond the Sun, beyond the Moon, the foam was on the Sea,And by the strand of Ilmarin there grew a golden Tree.(FR, II, viii, 388–89)Conflating the mallorn with Laurelin the Golden and herself with Yavanna, Galadriel yearns for the Blessed Realm. XXXXXXXX identification ofthese Elves with mallorn trees persists in verse remembered even beyondLothlórien’s borders: Legolas first describes the trees based on songsknown in Mirkwood (FR, II, vi, 349).Postscript: A Mallorn in the ShireXXXXXXXX planting of a single mallorn tree in Hobbiton somewhat mitigates the mutilation of the Party Tree, and this mallorn keeps the memory of Lothlórien alive once the Elves have left for Valinor. Just as theseed hidden in the soil is only revealed a few paragraphs before Samplants it, the species is not identified until the seed germinates in spring.XXXXXXXX young mallorn, like the many children born that year in the Shireand the plentiful harvest, is a sign of regeneration, happiness, and hope.For the hobbits of the Fellowship, this mallorn provides a vivid memory105XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsof their adventure and makes them appreciate their home all the more.For the other hobbit residents, the mallorn is a wondrous sight connecting their formerly isolated home to other lands and cultures; furthermore, the mallorn ensures continued interaction with the outside worldbecause people travel to see it (RK, VI, ix, 302–03). Establishing a chainof cultural associations similar to the White Tree of Gondor, the mallorn in the Shire metaphorically connects hobbits to Elves and the Valarbecause, by this point in the narrative, most of Lothlórien’s Elves haverelocated to the Undying Lands. XXXXXXXX web of cultural and historical interrelationships forged among the Elvish, human, and hobbit membersof the Fellowship is representationally maintained by the mallorn in theShire and the White Tree of Gondor: specimens of two fictional tree species that remain highly accessible to their respective hobbit and humanneighbors.In a text known for its highly original portrayal of tree-like beings,significant first-category trees such as these can also be found. This combination is rare, for, in the hands of other authors, regular trees typicallypale in comparison to trees that can do extraordinary things. In XXXXXXXX Lordof the Rings, trees like those in the Primary World are not overshadowedby other, more extraordinary trees; they play important roles while treesthat might otherwise steal the spotlight are simply not considered treesat all.III. Arrangements Too Unlike the Primary WorldBefore Tolkien had conceived of Ents as tree-herds, the narrativealready contained several significant trees of the first, second, and thirdcategories. XXXXXXXX holly trees at Hollin and the mallorn trees of Lothlórien,literary trees of the first category (essentially like Primary World trees),had already been committed to paper. XXXXXXXX hobbits’ experience in theOld Forest, containing an ambiguous coexistence of trees of the secondcategory (stationary trees that can talk, think, and feel) and the third (treesthat remain rooted but can independently move branches or trunk), alsohad been written. Although Tolkien would not consciously distinguishbetween regular and extraordinary trees until after Ents emerged in theirfinal form, “XXXXXXXX Old Forest” chapter indicates he was already considering the possibility that trees of the third category—like Old Man Willow—could not convincingly be called “trees,” while trees of the seconddegree—like the other trees of the Old Forest—could.XXXXXXXX Old Forest and Old Man Willow“XXXXXXXX Old Forest” is seldom recognized for the deliberately detailed,botanically credible, and carefully crafted chapter that it is. Verlyn Flieger106Cynthia M. Cohenconsiders the Old Forest “consciously menacing, consciously ill-intentioned toward those humans who invade it”:In the course of the hobbits’ journey through its tangled pathways the Old Forest trips them, traps them, throws branchesat them, blocks their progress, forces them to go where itwants rather than where they want, and does everything inits not inconsiderable power to make them feel unwanted,unwelcomed, and unliked. (“Eco-Conflict” 148)Flieger represents the scholarly consensus, indiscriminately ascribing sentience and a capacity for movement to all trees of the Old Forest. ClaudiaRiiff Finseth similarly asserts that these trees “do untreeish things thatgo against the laws of nature” (40). Anne C. Petty claims that “the OldForest…contains trees that are actively hostile toward creatures of theoutside and deliberately react to obstruct their progress,” asserting thatthe trees act “with very deliberate intent” (150–51, 236). Dinah Hazellwrites that the Old Forest’s “danger comes from the trees themselves”(73). XXXXXXXXse assertions overlook two important points: that the trees takeno physical action of which trees in the Primary World are incapable,and that the single tree that does so is not necessarily a tree at all.“XXXXXXXX Old Forest” chapter can be separated into three distinct segments that trace the evolution of Tolkien’s storytelling from the adoption of a traditional motif to the generation of a highly original fictionalforest. XXXXXXXX first segment contains a very credible description of the OldForest trees that could easily apply to a Primary World forest. XXXXXXXX second segment consists of quick movement through successive areas ofchanging forest density, serving as a transition to the third segment: theencounter with Old Man Willow. XXXXXXXX trees are represented as more “unlike . . . the actual arrangements of the Primary World” as the chapterproceeds through each segment, and it appears that Tolkien took painsto maintain “the inner consistency of reality” as this chapter developed(MC 138–40).In the first segment of the chapter, perhaps originally intending toportray the Old Forest as “the standard fairy-tale dark wood on the orderof those in ‘Snow White’ and ‘Hansel and Gretel,’” Tolkien ultimatelyconstructs a more realistic interpretation (Flieger, “Eco-Conflict” 149).Yet because the Old Forest superficially presents as a familiar motif, readers expect enchantment there; likewise, the hobbits, having heard rumors, expect to meet trees of the second, third, or fourth categories atevery turn. Early in the narrative, Sam’s neighbor calls the Old Forest“a dark bad place, if half the tales be true” (FR, I, i, 30). Fatty Bolger is“more afraid of the Old Forest than of anything [he knows] about: thestories about it are a nightmare” (FR, I, v, 118). Merry stirs up any latent107XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsfears just before the hobbits enter the Old Forest:[XXXXXXXX trees] watch you. . . . Occasionally [in daylight] themost unfriendly ones may drop a branch, or stick a root out,or grasp at you with a long trailer. But at night things canbe most alarming, or so I am told. I have only once or twicebeen in here after dark. . . . I thought all the trees were whispering to each other . . . and the branches swayed and gropedwithout any wind. XXXXXXXXy do say the trees actually move, andcan surround strangers and hem them in. (FR, I, vi, 121)Even Merry’s alleged eyewitness account smacks of rumor, pepperedwith phrases like “so I am told” and “they do say.” XXXXXXXX hobbits’ subsequent experience of the forest is similarly unsubstantiated: the hobbits’feelings of being watched, attacked, and sabotaged by the trees are entirely imagined:[XXXXXXXX hobbits] picked a way among the trees, . . . carefullyavoiding the many writhing and interlacing roots. . . . As theywent forward it seemed that the trees became taller, darker,and thicker. . . . For the moment there was no whisperingor movement among the branches; but they all got an uncomfortable feeling that they were being watched with disapproval, deepening to dislike and even enmity. . . . XXXXXXXXy foundthemselves looking up quickly, or glancing back over theirshoulders, as if they expected a sudden blow. (FR, I, vi, 122)Tolkien’s language is very consistent: phrases such as “it seemed that thetrees became taller, darker, and thicker,” “there was no whispering ormovement . . . but they all got an uncomfortable feeling,” and “as if they expected a sudden blow” present the scene in terms of the hobbits’ feelingsand perceptions rather than any physical action performed by the trees(emphasis added). Despite the constant suggestion that the trees can purposely inflict harm, the hobbits’ first glimpse of the Old Forest consistsonly of elements plausible in the Primary World: tree trunks “straight orbent, twisted, leaning, squat or slender, smooth or gnarled and branched;. . . stems were green or grey with moss and slimy, shaggy growths” (FR, I,vi, 122). Neither is there anything extraordinary about “writhing and interlacing roots”—these adjectives, conveying a sense of movement, alsodescribe forms sometimes seen in tree roots: with plentiful rainfall andlimited sunlight, trees may develop “snaky” roots that extend laterallyover the surface of the soil (Menninger 21, 34). Roots established just below the soil surface also could be revealed as a result of soil erosion. Treesin compacted, poorly aerated, or excessively wet soils typically produce108Cynthia M. Cohenvery shallow root systems that can emerge above ground (Harris, Clark,and Matheny 228).XXXXXXXX first segment of the chapter continues as the hobbits, ready to befrightened in the Old Forest, blame the trees for their inability to find apath through the woods. As before, Merry sets the tone: he says that theOld Forest contains “open tracks [that] seem to shift and change.” As henearly gets lost trying to lead the party to a vaguely remembered route,“the trees seemed constantly to bar their way” and “the wood seemed tobecome more crowded and more watchful than before.” Finding his way,Merry reflects: “XXXXXXXXse trees do shift. XXXXXXXXre is the Bonfire Glade in frontof us (or I hope so), but the path to it seems to have moved away!” (FR, I,vi, 121–22; emphasis added for “seem” and “seemed”). Despite Merry’sassertion, the trees do not move—a point demonstrated by Tolkien’s consistent use of language. A forest is an ever-changing system: various partsof the trees constantly grow while other parts fall to the ground. Withoutweekly gardener visits, a constant wind, or periodic flooding, debris willcollect under any living tree, creating a thick layer of organic matter thatcould easily obscure a path on the ground. Furthermore, where treesare the only landmarks, most people would become disoriented or lost.Indeed, the hobbits fare much better when they enter the Chetwood,following a more competent leader: “Strider guided them confidentlyamong the many crossing paths, although left to themselves they wouldsoon have been at a loss” (FR, I, xi, 194).While trees in the second segment of the chapter are ascribed somedegree of emotion, they still do not physically move unlike Primary Worldtrees—not even when “just behind [the hobbits] a large branch fell froman old overhanging tree” (FR, I, vi, 123). While effectively justifying thehobbits’ paranoia, this event corresponds to “summer branch drop,” aPrimary World condition where large limbs break—“for no obvious reason”—from trees that seem to be healthy and stable; this is typically seenin overmature, senescent trees, with branches that reach or extend pastthe edge of the canopy (Rushforth 1). Arborists report that “summerbranch drop is serious enough for the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew topost a large sign at each entrance warning visitors that ‘the older trees,particularly beech and elm, are liable to shed large branches withoutwarning’” (Harris, Clark, and Matheny 428). Tree species reported toexperience summer branch drop in England include ash, oak, and willow—a short list comprising every named species of broadleaf tree in theOld Forest (Harris, Clark, and Matheny 429; FR, I, vi, 125–26). Tolkien’ssuccinct phrase “an old overhanging tree” aptly describes a tree thatwould be prone to this condition. Thus, the only event in this chapterthat could be conceived of as a physical assault (besides the actions ofOld Man Willow) is botanically credible in the Primary World.109XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the RingsXXXXXXXX second segment of this chapter is marked by two shifts, the firstof which is a distinct change in tone. XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings contains fourspecific indications that the Old Forest trees can think or feel, and thefirst two occur in this chapter: the hobbits sense “the ill will of the wood”before the large branch falls; afterward, Frodo regrets having challenged“the menace of the trees.”7 XXXXXXXX vague discomfort of being watched isreplaced by a direct suggestion that the wood has a vindictive will of itsown (FR, I, vi, 122–24). Trees that, earlier in the chapter, were portrayedas belonging to the first category now take on descriptions more appropriate to the second category; in either case, the Old Forest trees havenot moved in ways that Primary World trees cannot. Besides foreshadowing Old Man Willow’s attack, this departure from the first categoryshows Tolkien’s assessment that trees with emotion and intent do notthreaten “the inner consistency of reality,” because he still calls them“trees.” XXXXXXXXse trees, which look like trees but may have powers beyondwhat mortals can perceive, seem simultaneously real and enchanted,thereby conveying the power and magic that Tolkien attributed to thingsbelonging to or coming from Faërie (Tolkien, Smith 74)—a quality thataugments these trees, initially portrayed as belonging to the first category,but does not necessitate a new ontological class.XXXXXXXX second shift characterizing this transitional segment of the chapter is a series of rapid changes in forest density. XXXXXXXX hobbits repeatedlymove from dense wood to sunny clearing, progressively failing to achievetheir desired direction and ultimately feeling extremely disoriented. Thisconfusion both provides a narrative transition to the third segment andjustifies the hobbits’ carelessness upon reaching Old Man Willow. XXXXXXXXhobbits are elated to exit the gloomy wood and enter the sun-drenchedvalley, even though it “is said to be the queerest part of the whole wood”(FR, I, vi, 122–26). XXXXXXXXir relief, combined with the natural tendency toassociate enchantment only with the dense woodland interior, makes thehobbits vulnerable to Old Man Willow.XXXXXXXX hobbits’ entrance into the Withywindle valley signals the thirdand final segment of this chapter, where the encounter with Old ManWillow forces Tolkien to consider a possible distinction between treescapable of thought, emotion, or speech and those that can move in extraordinary ways (but are not ambulatory). XXXXXXXX pattern of this segmentmirrors that of the chapter as a whole, as the initial landscape descriptionis entirely credible from a Primary World point of view:A golden afternoon of late sunshine lay warm and drowsyupon the hidden land. . . . XXXXXXXXre wound lazily a dark riverof brown water, bordered with ancient willows, arched overwith willows, blocked with fallen willows, and flecked with110Cynthia M. Cohenthousands of faded willow-leaves. XXXXXXXX air was thick withthem, fluttering yellow from the branches; for there was awarm and gentle breeze blowing softly in the valley, and thereeds were rustling, and the willow-boughs were creaking.(FR, I, vi, 126)Even without Old Man Willow’s enchantments, this landscape could lureany weary traveler to sleep: the breeze, the rustling reeds, and the soundof moving water beneath an airy shade describe a lovely spot for a nap.Like his surroundings, Old Man Willow is originally presented in a botanically believable (though anthropomorphic) way:[Frodo] saw leaning over him a huge willow-tree . . . . itssprawling branches going up like reaching arms with manylong-fingered hands, its knotted and twisted trunk gaping inwide fissures that creaked faintly as the boughs moved. (FR,I, vi, 127)Once more, Tolkien’s language is consistent, describing a tree that resembles a monster: “sprawling branches going up like reaching arms” (emphasis added).As in “XXXXXXXX Old Forest” chapter overall, however, the “primary material” that initially resembles “the actual arrangements of the PrimaryWorld” becomes more unlike those actual arrangements as the narrativeproceeds (MC 140). As sleep overtakes everyone but Sam, large cracksin Old Man Willow’s trunk “[gape] wide to receive” Merry and Pippin.This phrase, potentially describing either preexisting cavities or a trunkmoving in a way not possible in the Primary World, nudges Old ManWillow into the third category of literary trees. Immediately, Sam sensesthis change: “XXXXXXXXre’s more behind this than sun and warm air. . . . I don’tlike this great big tree. I don’t trust it.” XXXXXXXX hobbits soon realize that thiswillow does not quite fit their definition of “tree,” since it is capable ofmoving in unexpected ways, striking Frodo and trapping Merry and Pippin (FR, I, vi, 127–29). Despite Old Man Willow’s extraordinary behavior, the hobbits continue to refer to him as a tree; Tolkien’s considerationof this character as something other than a tree, however, is shown by ananalysis of Old Man Willow’s origins.In “XXXXXXXX Adventures of Tom Bombadil,” Old Man Willow traps TomBombadil just like he traps Merry and Pippin in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings(PS 14). This poem reveals no attempt to create a believable SecondaryWorld, but once Tom and Old Man Willow are transplanted into XXXXXXXXLord of the Rings, this point becomes crucial. XXXXXXXX inclusion of a tree of thethird category, not only thinking and feeling but also moving in unconventional ways, forced Tolkien to consider the relative credibility of OldMan Willow alongside the other trees of the Old Forest, which he had111XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsalready implied belong to the second category of literary trees (stationary trees that can talk, think, or feel). Yet no new ontological class wascreated for Old Man Willow, for “XXXXXXXX Adventures of Tom Bombadil”provided Tolkien with an easy solution: the poem suggests that Old ManWillow is an entity separate from the tree. Old Man Willow asks,“Ha, Tom Bombadil! What be you a-thinking,peeping inside my tree, watching me a-drinkingdeep in my wooden house, tickling me with feather,dripping wet down my face like a rainy weather?”(Bombadil 12)Old Man Willow seems to be an entity living within or associated witha tree—some sort of a spirit, or perhaps a Fairy. In the earliest knowndraft of the Old Forest episode, Tom describes him as a “thirsty earthbound spirit [that] had become imprisoned in the greatest Willow of theForest.” This draft explains that “XXXXXXXX [willow] tree did not die, thoughits heart went rotten, while the malice of the Old Man drew power outof earth and water, and spread…on both sides of the valley” (Shadow120–21). XXXXXXXXse descriptions of Old Man Willow align with Tolkien’scharacterization of Fairies as spirits coexisting with humans, “capable ofgood and evil, and possibly (in this fallen world) actually sometimes evil,”appearing to us in human form but appearing otherwise to other beings (Tolkien On Fairy-Stories 255). In the final text of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,Tolkien declines to specify what exactly Old Man Willow is, suggestingthat he did not find the spirit/Fairy explanation sufficient to justify OldMan Willow’s capacity for movement. XXXXXXXX obfuscated rewrite of Tom’sdescription omits “the Old Man” as subject, ascribing heart, strength,thought, and spirit to “the Great Willow” and identifying most of the OldForest trees as being “under its dominion.” Tolkien not only blurs the distinction between Old Man Willow and the other Old Forest trees; he alsomaintains an ambiguity within Old Man Willow’s character that refusesto commit him to the ranks of any one life form. By using the terms “oldWillow-man”8 and “Old Man Willow” interchangeably, Tolkien suggeststhat the character could be a tree-like man, a man-like tree, or somethingin between. Frodo intuits that, while Old Man Willow looks like a tree, hisactions mark him as something else altogether: “‘Tell us, Master,’ he said.‘about the Willow-man. What is he?’” (FR, I, vii, 137–41).Ents and Fangorn ForestWhile it is tempting to claim that Tolkien invented Ents to resolvehis own ambiguity about how to handle the relative credibility of theOld Forest trees and Old Man Willow, the distinct ontological separationbetween Ents and trees was an accident of creative history, for Ents—as112Cynthia M. CohenTolkien conceived of them—initially had nothing to do with trees. Tolkien wrote that Ents “grew rather out of their name, than the other wayabout. I always felt that something ought to be done about the peculiarA[nglo] Saxon word ent for a ‘giant’ or mighty person of long ago” (Letters208). Tolkien’s exposure to Old Norse literature and texts mentioning giants led to a coincidence of nomenclature that would determine the roleEnts assumed in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings.XXXXXXXX term “tree-man” and the proper name “Tree-Beard” seem tohave aided Tolkien’s association of the Old English word “ent” with trees.Edward Pettit identifies the word “trémaðr,” translated literally as “treeman,” in the Old Norse Hávamál and in Flateyjarbók (Pettit 16). XXXXXXXX variant forms “trémann” and “trémaðrinn” occur in Ragnars Saga Loðbrókar, a textlinked to the Völsunga Saga (Grimstad 218). XXXXXXXX Orkneyinga Saga uses thename “Þórir tréskegg,” translated as “Thorir Treebeard” or “Thorir TreeBeard” (Pettit 17; Pálsson and Edwards 16, 31–32). Early drafts demonstrate that, as Tolkien composed XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, he used the words“Tree-men” and “Treebeard” alongside descriptions of giants, which heassociated with the Anglo-Saxon word “ent.” Figure 1 depicts how theassociation of the words “Tree-men” and “Treebeard” with giants seemsto have set Tolkien’s notion of Ents as giants on course toward his conception of the Ents’ close involvement with trees. Tolkien’s only usage of“Tree-men” outside of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings appears in XXXXXXXX Book of LostTales, as a cryptic element in two lists (Lost Tales II 254, 261). This term,lurking in Tolkien’s unconscious, may account for his later associationof giants with trees, and his transformation of what Anders Stenströmcalls the “tree trope”—where an author expresses a giant’s great size bycomparison to a tree—into the notion that a giant could resemble a treein more ways than height (Stenstrom 60–61). Indeed, Tolkien wrote thathe “did not consciously invent [Ents] at all,” speculating that “somethinghad been going on in the ‘unconscious’ for some time” (Letters 211–12 n).Tolkien had used the “tree trope” in a version of “XXXXXXXX Tale of Tinúviel,”revised in the early to mid-1920s, to describe the “neck of Gilim the giant” as “taller than many elm trees” (Lost Tales II 46). Stenström proposesthat when, in an early draft of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, Tolkien used this “treetrope” and the term “Tree-Men” in the same paragraph, their juxtaposition produced a creative spark that would propel Ents toward their laterassociation with trees (Stenstrom 61). Sam asks “about these Tree-men,these giants, as you might call them? XXXXXXXXy do say that one bigger than atree was seen” (FR, I, ii, 53). XXXXXXXX editing process that led to that final text,however, proves revealing, as Christopher Tolkien reports:As my father first wrote Sam’s words, he said: ‘But whatabout these what do you call ’em—giants? XXXXXXXXy do say as113XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsone nigh as big as a tower or leastways a tree was seen. . . . ’This was changed at the time of writing to: ‘But what aboutthese Tree-Men, these here—giants? XXXXXXXXy do say one nighas big as a tower was seen,’ etc. (Shadow 254)During that revision, the “tree-trope” was replaced with the term “TreeMen” (Stenström 61). Furthermore, Tolkien may have partly envisionedwhat “Tree-men” would look like by associating the name “Treebeard”with the lichen genus Usnea, which can be seen hanging on ancient treeslike tinsel on a Christmas tree (Purvis 56).10 Usnea species are commonlycalled “beard lichens” and could be imagined as the beards of “Treemen” (Brodo, Sharnoff, and Sharnoff 95). Tolkien’s descriptions ofTreebeard’s “sweeping grey beard” as “thin and mossy at the ends” andof other Ents with “beards grey-green as moss” support this speculation(TT, III, iv, 66; TT, III, viii, 154).Treebeard’s first mention (in a late 1938 draft) confirms only thathe is a giant who is hostile to Gandalf, and the notion of Treebeard asan enemy of the Fellowship persisted (on and off) until the “Treebeard”chapter was composed (Shadow 363, 410). In the interim (around July1939), Tolkien decided that Treebeard—whatever his allegiance—wouldresemble a tree: “what [Frodo] had thought was the stem of a monstrousoaktree [sic] was really a thick gnarled leg with a rootlike foot and manyFigure 1. Converging trajectories for Old Man Willow and the Ents 9114Cynthia M. Cohenbranching toes” (Shadow 384). Even at this early stage when Treebeardwas first considered tree-like, Tolkien explicitly states that Frodo was mistaken in thinking that he was a tree. In an August 1939 outline, Tolkien detailed Treebeard’s appearance, distinguishing him from trees inthe process: Treebeard is “about 50 feet high with barky skin. Hair andbeard rather like twigs. Clothed in dark green like a mail of short shining leaves. [His] . . . many thanes and followers . . . look like young trees[?when] they stand” (Shadow 410). This outline also mentions that “thetree-giants assail the besiegers,” providing the first recorded instance ofEnts participating in battle.While Tolkien is—from the beginning of the final draft of the “Treebeard” chapter—consistently noncommittal about what specifically distinguishes Ents from trees, he makes it very clear that Ents and treesconstitute two distinct ontological classes. Treebeard informs Merry andPippin: “We are tree-herds, we old Ents” (TT, III, iv, 71). XXXXXXXX visual presentation of this explicitly stated distinction, however, is blurry at times;for instance, the description of morphological diversity at Entmootemploys much tree imagery and several references to familiar PrimaryWorld trees:A few [Ents] . . . reminded [Merry and Pippin] of beech-treesor oaks. . . . Some recalled the chestnut: brown-skinned Entswith large splayfingered hands, and short thick legs. Somerecalled the ash: tall straight grey Ents with many-fingeredhands and long legs; some the fir (the tallest Ents), and othersthe birch, the rowan, and the linden. (TT, III, iv, 83–84)As in Tolkien’s early descriptions of the Old Forest, his language makesthe Ents seem like trees without ever conceding that they are trees: “A few. . . reminded them of beech-trees or oaks,” “Some recalled the chestnut,”“Some recalled the ash” (emphasis added). Now, however, he refers directlyto legs, arms, and other body parts rather than employing anthropomorphic metaphors like those applied to Old Man Willow (FR, I, vi, 144).While Tolkien never describes his ambulatory trees as conscious manifestations of familiar tree species (as Holberg and MacDonald do), he doesseem to intentionally blur the visual boundaries between Ents and trees.Although Treebeard always distinguishes between trees and Ents, evenhe cannot pinpoint their differences: he says that some of the Ents are“going tree-ish,” and a few of the trees are “getting Entish.” (TT, III, iv,71). XXXXXXXX “-ish” suffixes that Treebeard uses may be viewed as consistentwith other vague language comparing trees and Ents without equatingthem to one another, and with the ambiguous language employed in“XXXXXXXX Old Forest” chapter. This interpretation shows that, while Tolkien had envisioned these ambulatory, tree-like beings as different from115XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsall other trees, he had some trouble explaining the relationship betweenEnts and trees as two separate ontological classes. After all, the organicevolution of Ents, by the time they emerged as tree-herds, afforded themthe odd distinction of looking like trees, being associated with trees, livingamong trees, and being charged with the responsibility to protect trees,but not actually being trees—a situation not imagined in literature beforeTolkien’s time.Although Ents look enough like trees that characters unaware oftheir existence mistake them for trees, the differences are clearer whenEnts and trees are physically separated. Merry and Pippin first see Treebeard in the open; they see “one old stump of a tree with only two bentbranches left: it looked almost like the figure of some gnarled old man,standing there, blinking.” XXXXXXXX text’s first proper description of Treebeardcannot be mistaken for a tree: “Man-like, almost Troll-like,” he has a distinct head with a face, a beard, and remarkable eyes as well as arms, feet,and toes (TT, III, iv, 65–66). Once the roused Ents strike out for Isengard, they are markedly distinguished from the trees in the area, which,in response to the Ents’ “great ringing shout: ra-hoom-rah!...quivered andbent as if a gust had struck them.” XXXXXXXX ensuing scene is defined by action of which trees—in both the Primary and Secondary Worlds—areincapable:XXXXXXXX Ents were swinging along with great strides down theslope. . . . Treebeard was at their head, and some fifty followers were behind him, two abreast, keeping step with theirfeet and beating time with their hands upon their flanks. (TT,III, iv, 88)Riding through the nameless wood at Helm’s Deep, Legolas senses something odd about the trees but sees nothing unusual until the companyexits the wood. Looking back, he sees three strange, tall shapes emergefrom the trees; soon joined by others of their kind, they all walk back intothe wood and disappear (TT, III, viii, 154–55). Besides being physicallyobstructed from view, the Ents also seem to vanish once they stand amidthe wood, relatively indiscernible in the context of trees.While Ents have much in common with trees, they are equally—ifnot more—like people. Besides the physical traits that trees lack (eyes,human-like appendages, and digits) and the ability to walk upright, Entsdemonstrate cultural development, evident in their linguistic prowessand in the system of government followed at Entmoot (TT, III, iv, 66; RK,Appendix F, I, 408–09; TT, III, iv, 82–86). XXXXXXXX memory of the presenceof Entwives and Entings demonstrates not only that Ents have familystructure, but also that they experience love, disagreement, and longing.Expressed in songs, chants, and poems, these emotions are captured in116Cynthia M. Cohena body of literature that further asserts the human side of Ents, exemplified by the song of the Ent and the Entwife (TT, III, iv, 80). Despitetheir differing perspectives toward nature recorded in this song, the livesof both genders, together constituting their own ontological class, areinextricably tied to trees.Unraveling the Mystery of HuornsXXXXXXXX nearly extemporaneous composition of the “Treebeard” chapter marks the merging of the two separate trajectories (Figure 1) thatdistinguished the development of trees of the first, second, and third categories (trees that do nothing unusual; trees that can talk, think, or feel;and trees that remain rooted but can independently move branches ortrunk) from trees of the fourth type (ambulatory trees) (Letters 231; Treason411). This event seems to have resulted in Tolkien’s conscious recognition that ambulatory trees are too “unlike…the actual arrangements ofthe Primary World,” as the Huorns that arise shortly thereafter in draftsof XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings are imagined with particular care not to rupture“the inner consistency of reality” (MC 140). While Tolkien had wantedto portray trees in battle, his ultimate portrayal of Ents was insufficientfor this purpose: they were tree-herds, not trees, and there were too fewof them to present a threat (Letters 212 n; TT, III, iv, 78). Still wishing toinclude an arboreal army in the narrative, Tolkien now consciously asks:At what point can a tree no longer be called a “tree”? Sharing with Entsthe ability to walk but lacking their capacity for culture, the ambiguousHuorns suggest that Tolkien never resolved whether physical mobilityalone was enough to justify a separate ontological class. Yet the Huorns’narrative evolution and their representation in the final text demonstratethat Tolkien had been forced to consider whether or not they could realistically be called “trees.”Tolkien’s early ideas about whom or what the Ents would lead intobattle span the second and fourth categories of literary trees, characterized by an ability to speak but also able to move from place to place. Inthe earliest published version of the Ents’ attack on Isengard, Tolkien hadalready determined that the trees the Ents would lead into battle shouldbe no ordinary trees: they enter the narrative with a name—“Galbedirs(Talking Trees).” A series of revisions follows, not possible to place inprecise chronological order. On one draft, Tolkien writes: “XXXXXXXX Ents senta force of walking trees (with split trunks).” Another draft shows evolvingnomenclature, from Galbedirs to Lamorni and then Ornómar, the nameglossed as “an old-fashioned Elvish” word for “Talking Trees…that[Ents] have trained and made half-entish.” Despite the later omission ofthe phrase “Talking Trees,” the idea that Ents taught trees to talk persistsin a later draft as “trees with voices . . . that the Ents have trained . . . though117XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsfar wilder . . . and crueller.” Wording much like the final text replaced the“trees with voices” passage (which “was rejected, probably at once,” according to Christopher Tolkien), and the name then changed from Ornómito Huorns. No longer suggesting that Ents have trained Huorns to be lesstree-like, Tolkien intentionally obfuscates the nature of the relationshipin this revision: Merry reports that he “cannot make out whether theyare trees that have become Entish, or Ents that have become tree-like, orboth” (War 47–56). In the final text, Merry speculates that Huorns “areEnts that have become almost like trees” (TT, III, ix, 170). XXXXXXXX textualhistory of these passages confirms that Tolkien struggled with the issuesof what sort of beings the Ents would lead into battle, what they wouldbe capable of, and how they would have become that way. In the finishedwork, the reader is led to believe that Huorns may be trees, Ents, orsomething else, revealing Tolkien’s uncertainty about how much treescould differ from “the actual arrangements of the Primary World” beforethreatening “the inner consistency of reality” (MC 140).XXXXXXXX purpose, nature, and narrative origin of Huorns are furthercomplicated by the characterization of Huorns as cruel, wild, dark, anddangerous. Most interpretations outside of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings—including Tolkien’s description of Fangorn Forest as “tense with hostilitybecause it was threatened by a machine-loving enemy”—cite a desirefor revenge akin to the second- and third-category Old Forest trees (Letters 420). While such revenge is justified by Saruman’s reckless felling oftrees, Treebeard suggests another explanation: that “the Great Darkness,” which Wayne G. Hammond and Christina Scull define as “thetime of [Melkor’s] domination of Middle-earth,” still lingers in FangornForest (384; TT, III, iv, 71 and 77). Treebeard’s suggestion, more malevolent and less concrete than any possible physical threat to trees, issupported by a scene late in the narrative, when the defeat of Sauroncauses the Great Darkness to lift from the depths of Fangorn Forest. Asthe Fellowship disbands, Legolas plans to “visit the deep places of theEntwood,” and Treebeard’s open invitation to travelers indicates there isnothing there to fear (RK, VI, vi, 259). XXXXXXXX ambiguous attribution of theHuorns’ emotion further obscures their mode of being: Huorns drivenby vengeance would be intrinsically capable of emotion, but Huornsmade cruel by the Great Darkness would be non-sentient trees given thecapacity to feel by an outside source.Precisely how Huorns move is also largely unexplained. AlthoughHuorns are unquestionably ambulatory, descriptions of Huorns in motion are invariably mysterious, characterized by diffuse, untraceablesounds: rustling and creaking, “a noise like a rushing wind,” and “whisperings and groanings and an endless rustling sigh” (TT, III, ix, 170–71;TT, III, viii, 158). Moving Huorns are also communicated through sights118Cynthia M. Cohenobscured or obstructed, such as an absent moon, a “darkness blackerthan the night,” a gathering mist, and “moving towers of shadow” (TT,III, viii, 158). Yet Huorns, standing still, are inevitably mistaken for trees.Legolas, one of the most arboriculturally savvy characters in XXXXXXXX Lordof the Rings, is baffled in the presence of standing Huorns; he calls them“the strangest trees that ever [he] saw” (TT, III, viii, 152). XXXXXXXX text’s onlydetailed physical description of Huorns, while grotesque and ominous,still depicts trees that could exist in the Primary World (TT, III, viii, 151):“Long sweeping boughs [that hang] down like searching fingers” couldoccur on any number of tree species with a pendulous branching habit,such as the weeping willow hybrid that thrives in Britain (Salix × sepulcralis nv. chrysoloma) or the pendulous beech (Fagus sylvatica ‘Pendula’), animpressive specimen of which stands in Oxford’s University Parks (Miles192; Günther 239). “Roots [that stand] up from the ground like the limbsof strange monsters” are generally termed aerial or adventitious rootswhen found on Primary World trees, occurring partially above groundand functioning like snorkels to facilitate root respiration in submergedconditions; the roots become visible if the standing water subsides(Thomas 103–07). XXXXXXXX aerial stilt roots of the mangrove (Rhizophora species), for example, originate on the trunk several feet above ground andoften branch as they approach the soil surface, sometimes resembling acreature with many legs and long toes (Menninger 27–34). XXXXXXXXrefore,Huorns look essentially like trees, except when they are in motion; yetthe absence of visual descriptions of motion maintains the overall notionof a tree-like appearance. Since these beings that look like trees are neveractually seen moving—not by the reader, nor by any character (besidesperhaps the Ents)—the “inner consistency of reality” is preserved.XXXXXXXX name that Tolkien finally chose for these beings reflects the Huorns’ ambiguous portrait: while the second syllable, “-orn,” unequivocallyrefers to some kind of tree,11 “Hu-” defies precise definition. Althoughscholarly discussion of the etymology of “Hu-” has yielded only speculative conclusions, there is a general consensus that the meaning of “Hu-”relates to the Huorns’ ability to speak; unpublished notes by Tolkien similarly suggest a possible derivation from the base KHUG- “bark, bay”(Wynne; Hammond and Scull 425). XXXXXXXX combination of the mysterious“Hu-” and the unambiguous tree-element “-orn” conveys exactly whatTolkien endeavored to express about these tree-like beings: Huorns havesome relationship with trees, and might even be trees, but the reader ofXXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings will never know their specific nature. By obfuscatingthe degree to which Huorns differ from “the actual arrangements of[trees in] the Primary World,” Tolkien manages to maintain “the innerconsistency of reality” (MC 140).119XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the RingsIV. XXXXXXXX Functions of FantasyBy representing trees in this way, Tolkien provides recovery, escape,and consolation; these functions, in turn, coalesce into a purposefulmessage (MC 145). As readers tend not to perceive the differentiationof trees, Ents, and Huorns that is explored in this article, the generalimpression readers have of trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings is that they candefend themselves. Pointing back to the underlying truth that trees in thePrimary World are relatively helpless, this impression provides consolation, allowing escape to a Secondary World where trees do have theirown means of defense (MC 155). Furthermore, Tolkien’s usage of treelike beings with human-like characteristics and culture reminds us that,in the Primary World, people are the only real defense that trees haveagainst most of the modern threats that they face. XXXXXXXX very thing thatmost readers do not notice in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings—the distinction between trees and tree-like beings, and the convincing portrayal of bothlife forms—creates a space where regular trees can function significantlywithin the narrative without exceeding the physical limits of their Primary World counterparts. By making trees of the first category significantin the narrative, Tolkien enables a sense of recovery, allowing his readersto see trees—which, for many of us, have become all too familiar—in avivid, new light (MC 146). Portraying trees as something worth fightingfor and asserting the connections that exist between humans and trees,Tolkien compels his readers to become responsible for preserving andprotecting the trees in their own lives.NOTES1 Although Tolkien considered this story a “nearly perfect tale” in the1930s, a critical re-reading in 1964 “filled [him] with distaste” (TolkienOn Fairy-Stories 250; Tolkien, Smith 69). MacDonald’s Phantastes “afflicted [Tolkien] with profound dislike” (Smith 69).2 Arthur Rackham partly inspired Tolkien’s conception of Old ManWillow (Carpenter, Biography 165).3 While Tolkien probably never saw “the grandest stand of holly inBritain” (in Staverton Park), he may have seen large hollies in SuttonColdfield Park or the Stiperstones in Shropshire, both near Birmingham (Rackham, Ancient Woodland 347; Rackham, Trees and Woodland134, 161; Miles 159). Other potentially accessible large hollies weredocumented during Tolkien’s lifetime in Warwickshire, Yorkshire,Cornwall, and the Chiltern Hills (Loudon 515; Dallimore 40; Elwesand Henry 1717).120Cynthia M. Cohen4 Within XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, these trees are called “the White Treeand the Golden” and “the Trees of Silver and Gold,” and separatementions of “the Silver Tree” and “Laurelin the Golden” imply thecorollary names “the Golden Tree” and “Telperion the Silver” (or“the White”) (TT, III, xi, 204; TT, IV, iii, 252; TT, III, ii, 25; RK, Appendix A, I, i, 314).5 Tolkien’s awareness of botanical relationships at the family level (e.g.,Rosaceae) is confirmed by Quickbeam’s unrelated reference to rowanas part of “the people of the Rose” (TT, III, iv, 87).6 Tolkien may have known of the “mummy seeds” collected from ancient Egyptian graves, which people thought might still be capable ofgermination. During Tolkien’s lifetime, many respectable scientistssupported this theory; while the notion is refuted today, the popularity of this tale persists (Kesseler and Stuppy 163).7 In successive chapters, Tom Bombadil “[lays] bare the hearts of treesand their thoughts,” describing them as “filled . . . with pride androoted wisdom, and with malice,” and Treebeard speculates that“bad memories are handed down” (FR, I, vii, 141; TT, III, iv, 71).8 Tolkien may have derived this name from “XXXXXXXX Willow-Man” byJuliana Horatia Ewing, published first in Aunt Judy’s Magazine (1872)and later as one of two poems in Tongues in Trees (1884), a book ofverses intended for children (Laski 100). XXXXXXXX subject of this poembelongs in the second category of literary trees.9 A: 1934 (Scull and Hammond, Chronology 173; early 1938 (Scull andHammond, Chronology 210, 221; Shadow 110–113, 302, 327–29);1941–42 (Treason 411); 1942–44 (War 16–17, 27–30, 42–56, 77–78);1954 (Scull and Hammond, Chronology 444). B: 1916–17 (Lost Tales I1; Lost Tales II 254, 261); mid-1938 (Scull and Hammond, Chronology220; Shadow 254); late 1938 (Scull and Hammond, Chronology 222;Shadow 363); 1939 (Treason 210; Shadow 410); 1940 (Treason 71).10 One sense of the OED definition of “tree-beard” is “the lichen Usneabarbata,” which Tolkien may have seen in the Swiss Alps (470; Sculland Hammond, Chronology 27; Black 39). Although rare in Englandtoday, large specimens of Usnea were common there in the mid- tolate nineteenth century (Balfour 545).11 XXXXXXXX names mallorn, Fangorn, Celeborn (the White Tree), and Hírilorn are consistent with Tolkien’s translations of “orne” and “-orn”(Letters 308; Lost Road 379; S 172). XXXXXXXX nomenclature of two treesstill found in England corroborate this meaning: manna ash (Fraxinus121XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsornus, formerly called Ornus europaea) and rowan, for which Ornus wasonce a recorded common name (Campbell-Culver 6, 88, 107).WORKS CITEDBalfour, John Hutton. A Manual of Botany. Edinburgh: Adam and CharlesBlack, 1863.Baum, L. Frank. XXXXXXXX Annotated Wizard of Oz: XXXXXXXX Wonderful Wizard of Oz.Ed. Michael Patrick Hearn. Centennial ed. New York: Norton,2000.Black, C. B. Guide to Switzerland and the Italian Lakes. Edinburgh: Adam andCharles Black, 1876.Boitani, Piero. “Chaucer and Lists of Trees.” Reading Medieval Studies:Annual Proceedings of the Graduate Centre for Medieval Studies in theUniversity of Reading. Ed. John Norton-Smith and Peter Noble.Reading, Eng.: XXXXXXXX Centre, 1976: 28–44.Brodo, Irwin M., Sylvia Duran Sharnoff, and Stephen Sharnoff. Lichensof North America. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2001.Campbell-Culver, Maggie. A Passion for Trees: XXXXXXXX Legacy of John Evelyn.London: Eden Project Books, 2006.Carpenter, Humphrey. Tolkien: A Biography. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,1987.Chesterton, G. K. “XXXXXXXX Tree of Pride.” Daylight and Nightmare: UncollectedStories and Fables. Comp. Marie Smith. London: Xanadu, 1986:58–59. [Originally published in 1922.]Costello, Laurence R., Edward J. Perry, Nelda P. Matheny, J. MichaelHenry, and Pamela M. Geisel. Abiotic Disorders of Landscape Plants:A Diagnostic Guide. Publication 3420. Oakland, CA: Universityof California, Agriculture and Natural Resources, 2003.Dallimore, W. Holly, Yew and Box. London: John Lane, 1908.Edlin, H. L. British Woodland Trees. London: Batsford, 1945.Elwes, Henry John, and Augustine Henry. XXXXXXXX Trees of Great Britain andIreland. Edinburgh: Privately printed, 1913. Vol. 7. 7 vols. 1906–1913.Ewing, Juliana Horatia. Tongues in Trees. London: Society for PromotingChristian Knowledge, 1884.122Cynthia M. CohenFinseth, Claudia Riiff. “Tolkien’s Trees.” Mallorn 35 (1997): 37–44.Flieger, Verlyn. “Taking the Part of Trees: Eco-Conflict in MiddleEarth.” J.R.R. Tolkien and His Literary Resonances. Ed. GeorgeClark and Daniel Timmons. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press,2000: 147–58.Ford, Patrick K., trans. “Cad Goddeu.” XXXXXXXX Mabinogi and other MedievalWelsh Tales. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977: 183–87.Grimstad, Kaaren. Rev. of Studies in Ragnars Saga Loðbrókar and Its Major Scandinavian Analogues, by Rory McTurk. Speculum 69 (1994):218–20.Günther, R. T. Oxford Gardens. Based upon Daubeny’s Popular Guide to the Physick Garden of Oxford. With Notes on the Gardens of the Colleges and onthe University Park. Oxford: Parker and Son, 1912.Hamilton, James. Arthur Rackham. New York: Arcade, 1990.Hammond, Wayne G., and Christina Scull. XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings: A Reader’s Companion. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2005.Harris, Richard W., James R. Clark, and Nelda P. Matheny. Arboriculture:Integrated Management of Landscape Trees, Shrubs, and Vines. 4th ed.Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004.Haycock, Marged. “XXXXXXXX Significance of the ‘Cad Goddau’ [sic] TreeList in the Book of Taliesin.” Celtic Linguistics: Ieithyddiaeth Geltaidd: Readings in the Brythonic Languages. Ed. Martin J. Ball, et al.Amsterdam Studies in the XXXXXXXXory and History of LinguisticScience IV: Current Issues in Linguistic XXXXXXXXory. Amsterdam: J.Benjamins,1990: 297–331.Hazell, Dinah. XXXXXXXX Plants of Middle-Earth: Botany and Sub-Creation. Kent,OH: Kent State University Press, 2006.Holberg, Ludvig. XXXXXXXX Journey of Niels Klim to the World Underground. 1742.Ed. James I. McNelis, Jr. Lincoln, NE: University of NebraskaPress, 1960.Howard, Alexander L. Trees in Britain. London: Collins, 1946.Johnson, Owen, and David More, eds. Tree Guide: XXXXXXXX Most Complete FieldGuide to the Trees of Britain and Europe. London: Collins, 2004.Jones, Leslie Ellen. Myth and Middle-Earth. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: ColdSpring Press, 2002.123XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the RingsKesseler, Rob, and Wolfgang Stuppy. Seeds: Time Capsules of Life. Ed. Alexandra Papadakis. Buffalo, NY: Firefly Books, 2006.Laski, Marghanita. Mrs. Ewing, Mrs. Molesworth, and Mrs. Hodgson Burnett.London: Arthur Barker, 1950.Lewis, C. S. XXXXXXXX Magician’s Nephew. New York: Scholastic, 1995. [Originally published in 1955.]———. Prince Caspian. New York: Scholastic, 1995. [Originally publishedin 1951.]Lewis, W. H., and Walter Hooper, eds. Letters of C. S. Lewis. Revised Harvest ed. San Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace, 1993.Lindsay, David. A Voyage to Arcturus. New York: Ballantine, 1968.Loudon, J. C. Arboretum Et Fruticetum Britannicum; or, XXXXXXXX Trees and Shrubs ofBritain, Native and Foreign, Hardy and Half-Hardy, Pictorially and Botanically Delineated, and Scientifically and Popularly Described. London:J. C. Loudon, 1844. Vol. 2. 8 vols.MacDonald, George. XXXXXXXX Golden Key. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1968. [Originally published in 1867.]———. Phantastes. New York: Schocken, 1982. [Originally published in1858.]Menninger, Edwin A. Fantastic Trees. Portland, OR: Timber Press, 1995.[Originally published in 1967.]Miles, Archie. Silva: XXXXXXXX Tree in Britain. London: Ebury Press, 1999.Morse, Richard. A Book of Common Trees. New York: Oxford UniversityPress, 1942.Moseley, C. W. R. D., trans. XXXXXXXX Travels of Sir John Mandeville. New York:Penguin, 1983.Pálsson, Hermann, and Paul Edwards, trans. Orkneyinga Saga: XXXXXXXX Historyof the Earls of Orkney. London: Hogarth, 1978.Patch, Howard Rollin. XXXXXXXX Other World. New York: Octagon Books, 1970.[Originally published in 1950.]Pettit, Edward. “Treebeard’s Roots in Medieval European Tradition.”Mallorn 42 (2004): 11–18.Petty, Anne C. Tolkien in the Land of Heroes: Discovering the Human Spirit. ColdSpring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Press, 2003.124Cynthia M. CohenPorteous, Alexander. XXXXXXXX Forest in Folklore and Mythology. New York: Dover,2002. [Originally published in 1928.]Purvis, William. Lichens. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press,2000.Rackham, Oliver. Ancient Woodland: Its History, Vegetation and Uses in England. London: Edward Arnold, 1980.———. Trees and Woodland in the British Landscape: XXXXXXXX Complete History ofBritain’s Trees, Woods and Hedgerows. Revised ed. London: PhoenixPress, 2001.Rane, Karen, and Nancy Pataky. “Managing Infectious Plant Diseases.”Plant Health Care for Woody Ornamentals. Ed. John Lloyd. Illinois:International Society of Arboriculture (Savoy, IL) and Cooperative Extension Service; College of Agricultural, Consumer,and Environmental Sciences; University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign; 1997: 77–106.Read, Helen. Veteran Trees: A Guide to Good Management. Peterborough,Eng.: Northminster House, 2000.Root, Robert Kilburn. “Chaucer’s Dares.” Modern Philology 15 (1917):1–22.Rushforth, K. D. “Summer Branch Drop.” Arboricultural Research Note. UKDepartment of the Environment, Forestry Commission. Dec.1979: 1–2.Russell, Beth. “Botanical Notes on the Mallorn.” Mallorn 43 (2005): 20–22.Schopmeyer, C. S., ed. Seeds of Woody Plants in the United States. AgricultureHandbook No. 450. Washington, DC: Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1974.Scull, Christina, and Wayne G. Hammond. XXXXXXXX J.R.R. Tolkien Companionand Guide: Chronology. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006.———. XXXXXXXX J.R.R. Tolkien Companion and Guide: Reader’s Guide. Boston:Houghton Mifflin, 2006.Simpson, Michael, trans. XXXXXXXX Metamorphoses of Ovid. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press, 2001.Stenström, Anders. “Some Notes on Giants in Tolkien’s Writings.” Scholarship and Fantasy: Proceedings of the Tolkien Phenomenon. Ed. K. J.Battarbee. Turku, Finland: University of Turku, 1993: 53–71.125XXXXXXXX Unique Representation of Trees in XXXXXXXX Lord of the RingsStern, Kingsley R. Introductory Plant Biology. 5th ed. Dubuque, IA: Wm. C.Brown Publishers, 1991.Sutton, David. Trees of Britain and Europe. London: Kingfisher, 2002.[Originally published in 1990.]Thomas, Peter. Trees: XXXXXXXXir Natural History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.Tolkien, J.R.R. “Nomenclature of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings.” XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings: A Reader’s Companion. Wayne G. Hammond and ChristinaScull. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2005: 750–82.———. Smith of Wootton Major. Extended ed. Ed. Verlyn Flieger. London:HarperCollins Publishers, 2005.———. Tolkien on Fairy-Stories. Expanded ed. Ed. Verlyn Flieger andDouglas A. Anderson. London: HarperCollins Publishers,2008.Tolkien, J.R.R., trans. Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, Pearl and Sir Orfeo.Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1975.“Tree.” XXXXXXXX Oxford English Dictionary. 2nd ed. 1989.White, T. H. XXXXXXXX Sword in the Stone. New York: Putnam, 1939.Wynne, Patrick H. “_Huorn_.” Online posting. 8 August 2003. Lambengolmor. 15 February 2008. <http://tech.groups.yahoo.com/group/lambengolmor/message/470>.127Copyright © West Virginia University PressClinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influence:Swerving from and CompletingGeorge MacDonaldJOSH LONGIn 1973, the year J.R.R. Tolkien passed away, Harold Bloom released his seminal work XXXXXXXX Anxiety of Influence: A XXXXXXXXory of Poetry. AlthoughBloom’s book has had a profound effect on the topic of literary influence,his theory has received minimal attention within the field of Tolkienstudies. Faye Ringel takes a Bloomian approach in her article “WomenFantasists: In the Shadow of the Ring,” though, ultimately, her articlefocuses primarily on those whom Tolkien influenced. Diana Glyer alsoconsiders XXXXXXXX Anxiety of Influence in the final chapter of her book-lengthstudy XXXXXXXX Company XXXXXXXXy Keep: C. S. Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien as Writers inCommunity; however, she is more interested in expanding the notion ofliterary influence rather than evaluating how Tolkien’s fiction fits intoBloom’s paradigm. This article serves to demonstrate that Bloom’s theory is relevant to both Tolkien’s creative journey in general and Smith ofWootton Major in particular.In XXXXXXXX Anxiety of Influence, Bloom develops six revisionary ratios—ways in which one poet influences another. I am only interested in thefirst two—clinamen and tessera. XXXXXXXX former might be best described as acorrective swerve, a turning away from a precursor poet in attempt tocorrect what he did wrong; the latter is antithetical completion, whichoccurs when a poet retains a precursor’s terms but means them in a different way (Bloom 14).XXXXXXXXse revisionary ratios are performed by a poet as a means “to clearimaginative space for” himself (Bloom 5). As the modern writer (postEnlightenment) seeks to achieve literary greatness, he inevitably becomesanxious over influence and, consequently, reacts to his literary precursor.Through a revisionary movement in his own text, the writer is able tocreate something original and thus pacify his fear of indebtedness. At theheart of Bloom’s theory is this idea: “XXXXXXXX history of fruitful poetic influence,which is to say the main tradition of Western poetry since the Renaissance, is a history of anxiety and self-saving caricature, of distortion, of perverse, wilful revisionismwithout which modern poetry as such could not exist” (30, emphasis in original).In Smith, Tolkien sought to correctively swerve from and antitheticallycomplete MacDonald’s XXXXXXXX Golden Key.XXXXXXXX Unfinished Preface to XXXXXXXX Golden KeyWhen Tolkien began Smith in late 1964, he was not intending to128Josh Longwrite a story about Faërie. In fact, he was not even initially trying to tella tale; the story arose almost accidentally.1 It began with a simple requestfrom a publisher. Pantheon Books of New York inquired on 2 September1964 whether Tolkien would write a preface to a new edition of GeorgeMacDonald’s XXXXXXXX Golden Key. Tolkien responded to their query on 7 September: “I should like to write a short preface to a separate edition of XXXXXXXXGolden Key. I am not as warm an admirer of George MacDonald as C. S.Lewis was; but I do think well of this story of his” (Letters 351). ThoughTolkien had supervised a B.Litt. thesis on MacDonald in 1934 and mayhave reread him in 1938 or 1939 while working on “On Fairy-stories,”he had almost certainly not read MacDonald for nearly three decades..2XXXXXXXXrefore, when he accepted the request from Pantheon books to writea preface to XXXXXXXX Golden Key, he was basing his decision largely on the factthat he had praised the story in “On Fairy-stories.” In actuality, he onlyhad vague memories of what it was really like.After rereading XXXXXXXX Golden Key, Tolkien discovered that he did notlike it at all. According to Carpenter, Tolkien claimed that it was “illwritten, incoherent, and bad, in spite of a few memorable passages”(quoted in Biography 244). Elsewhere, he stated that “re-reading G[eorge]M[acDonald] critically filled me with distaste” (Smith 69).3 In spite ofthese misgivings, he persisted in trying to write a preface:A fairy tale is a tale about that world, a glimpse of it; if youread it, you enter Fairy with the author as your guide. Hemay be a bad guide or a good one: bad if he does not takethe adventure seriously, and is just ‘spinning a yarn’ whichhe thinks is good enough ‘for children’; good, if he knowssomething about Fairy, and has himself caught some glimpses of it which he is trying to put into words. But Fairy is verypowerful. Even the bad guide cannot escape it. He probablymakes up his tale out of bits of older tales, or things he halfremembers, and they may be too strong for him to spoil ordisenchant. (Smith 74-5)Tolkien’s tone is slightly cynical, if not critical. He was struggling to writea preface for a book and an author he now disliked; his contempt seepsinto his prose. Surely, Tolkien considered MacDonald a “bad guide”;however, this view would not be made plain until the actual story ofSmith.XXXXXXXX Negative Influence of MacDonald4Understandably, Tolkien never completed his preface to XXXXXXXX GoldenKey. He abandoned it because he had lost interest in MacDonald andfound a story of his own beginning to unfold. Tolkien notes, “If I had129Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influencegone on [writing the preface] I should only have written a severely critical or ‘anti’ essay on G[eorge] M[acDonald]—unnecessary, and a pitysince G[eorge] M[acDonald] has performed great services for otherminds—such as Jack’s” ((Smith 69).5 Although the ‘anti’ essay was neverwritten, Smith undoubtedly became charged with Tolkien’s feelings ofdeep resentment and discontent over MacDonald’s stories—particularlyXXXXXXXX Golden Key.On at least two separate occasions, Tolkien acknowledged MacDonald’s negative influence on Smith. On 26 October 1966, Tolkien read Smithaloud at Blackfriars, the Dominican house of studies in St. Giles, Oxford.In his prefatory comments, he remarked, “XXXXXXXX story was (as often happens) the result of an irritant. And since the irritant will in some degreeaffect the presentation of the movement in the mind that it sets goingI will just say what the irritant was in this case. George MacDonald. Awriter for whom I have a sincere and humble—dislike” (quoted in Sculland Hammond, Reader’s Guide 945). Additionally, in writing to Clyde S.Kilby, Tolkien called Smith “an anti-G[eorge] M[acDonald] tract” (Smith70). Inevitably, Tolkien was so dissatisfied with MacDonald that he feltcompelled to write a reactionary story to XXXXXXXX Golden Key.What was it that bothered him so much about MacDonald’s writing? First, Tolkien was dissatisfied with the XXXXXXXX Golden Key’s tone; he feltthat fairy tales shouldn’t be written with children in mind. MacDonaldhad inevitably succumbed to this “error of false sentiment” (MC 130)In a note he sent to Kilby, he observes, “I had of course, never thoughtof XXXXXXXX G[olden] K[ey] as a story for children,” but then adds this parenthetical jab, “(though apparently G[eorge] McD[onald] did)” (Smith 69).6Tolkien’s attitude is further emphasized by the fact that on 2 March 1966,he told Henry Resnik: “I didn’t write [XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings] for children.That’s why I don’t like George MacDonald very much; he’s a horrible oldgrandmother” (Resnik 41).7 Second, he felt MacDonald had a tendencyto ruin his fairy tales by being overly didactic—they came off more assermons than stories. Kilby recalls, “He called him an ‘old grandmother’who preached instead of writing” (Tolkien 31). Tolkien mentioned thisless hostilely in his unfinished preface to XXXXXXXX Golden Key, “All the same Imust warn you that [MacDonald] is a preacher, not only on the platformor in the pulpit; in all his many books he preaches” (Smith 71). Finally,Tolkien was also displeased that MacDonald wrote allegories—a formhe inherently disliked. Tolkien explains,“But [C. S. Lewis] was evidentlyborn loving (moral) allegory, and I was born with an instinctive distastefor it. ‘Phantastes’ [by MacDonald] wakened him, and afflicted me withprofound dislike” (Smith 69).8130Josh LongClinamen: XXXXXXXX Corrective SwerveDespite Tolkien’s praise of XXXXXXXX Golden Key, he now saw MacDonald’sstory as a flawed and ineffective work, and as it was, he was determinedto rewrite it the way he felt it should have been written. In part, this iswhat he tried to accomplish through Smith. Bloom notes,A poet swerves away from his precursor, by so reading hisprecursor’s poem as to execute a clinamen in relation to it.This appears as a corrective movement in his own poem,which implies that the precursor poem went accurately upto a certain point, but then should have swerved, precisely inthe direction that the new poem moves. (14)This is an accurate description of writing Smith. Tolkien believed MacDonald’s story “went accurately up to a certain point,” but when MacDonald should have been concerned with the integrity of Faërie, he fellto “juvenilizing,” moralizing, and allegorizing it.What MacDonald did right, however, was that he attempted storiesabout the fantastical. Regardless of how distasteful Tolkien now found hisapproach to Faërie, he valued the basic structure of XXXXXXXX Golden Key. Afterall, Smith and XXXXXXXX Golden Key contain very similar plots—a character orcharacters journey throughout an enchanted Otherworld. Consequently,MacDonald was the immediate influence that prompted Tolkien to writea fairy tale in which a human comes into contact with Faërie.Correcting the JuvenilityTolkien was not necessarily opposed to what MacDonald was doingbut how he was doing it. He was bothered by the superfluous asides foundin XXXXXXXX Golden Key that were intended to help children follow the storyline,keep them engaged, or teach them. We know that Smith was not writtenwith children in mind. Tolkien made this plain: “But the little tale was (ofcourse) not intended for children!” (Letters 388-9). This conviction aboutfairy tales—that they “should not be specially associated with children”—was an idea he first proposed in “On Fairy-Stories” (MC 135), and itgreatly affected his approach in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings.9 It was, however, inSmith that Tolkien made his most adamant pronouncement that the fairytale is really an adult genre.XXXXXXXX first indication of Tolkien’s clinamen can be found in the openingsentence of the story. Like XXXXXXXX Golden Key, Smith begins quite traditionally,yet it establishes a very different tone than MacDonald’s story.Smith: “XXXXXXXXre was a village once, not very long ago for thosewith long memories, nor very far away for those with longlegs.” (5)131Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of InfluenceXXXXXXXX Golden Key: “XXXXXXXXre was a boy who used to sit in the twilight and listen to his great-aunt’s stories.” (1)At first glance, the two sentences appear alike; however, each author hasa different audience in mind. In XXXXXXXX Golden Key, Mossy listens to his aunt’sstory-telling just as many children first hear XXXXXXXX Golden Key read aloud. Inthis way, MacDonald is able to establish sympathy between his juvenileaudience and the protagonist of the story. In addition, MacDonald assumes that his audience has little patience for an opening setting becausehe advances directly into the story.Tolkien’s approach is wholly different and intended for a more mature reader. His narrative begins with wordplay; the word long is usedto refer to a duration of time, extended mental capacities, and height.Though an inexperienced reader might grow confused, to an adult, thesentence is intriguing and engaging. Moreover, the parallelism makes thesentence syntactically lucid, and the alliteration and consonance makesit dictionally graceful. “XXXXXXXXre was a village once, not very long ago forthose with long memories, nor very far away for those with long legs”(5). What is more, unlike MacDonald, Tolkien develops an opening setting; in typical Tolkienian fashion, he spends three paragraphs discussing the workings of Wootton Major before he even mentions the firstcharacter (5-7). Smith and XXXXXXXX Golden Key are initially distinct. As we movethrough both narratives, the differences between the two texts becomeeven more pronounced.Whether XXXXXXXX Golden Key was originally written for children is less important than the fact that it appears to be. MacDonald assists the childby indicating that he is shifting scenes. “And now I will go back to theborders of the forest” (10). Such an interpolation is unnecessary. An adultcould figure this out for himself, but such a shift would be more difficultfor a young reader to make. XXXXXXXX Golden Key also contains childish questions. After Mossy finds the golden key, the narrator asks, “Where wasthe lock to which the key belonged? It must be somewhere, for how couldanybody be so silly as make a key for which there was no lock? Whereshould he go to look for it?” (9). MacDonald is obviously trying to draw inthe young reader, but to an adult, such questions are patronizing.XXXXXXXX intrusive narrator also takes on more of a didactic approach. Heis decidedly concerned with Mossy and Tangle’s hygienic practices. XXXXXXXXmorning after Tangle is first cleansed by Grandmother, he observes, “Forhaving once been in her grandmother’s pond, [Tangle] must be cleanand tidy ever after; and, having put on her green dress, felt like a lady”(28). As if the narrator’s emphasis on routine bathing is not enough, hetakes it one step further by teaching his readers a lesson on altruism. “Butthe wearer of Grandmother’s clothes never thinks about how he or she132Josh Longlooks, but thinks always how handsome other people are” (33). We beginto see why Tolkien referred to MacDonald as a grandmother.Tolkien, unlike MacDonald, is not interested in the child as reader,and this can be seen most clearly in his visions of Faery. XXXXXXXXy are bafflingfor an adult, let alone a child. Verlyn Flieger provides an accurate assessment of the enigmatic nature of these visions: “Wandering in myth hedoes not understand, Smith of Wootton Major witnesses a whole worldto which he does not have the key; nor, in consequence, does the reader.. . . XXXXXXXX questions are not just unanswered, they are unasked” (196).Indeed, Tolkien’s portrayal of Faery remains so mysterious that whenTolkien swerved from MacDonald, he turned around rather than to theside. While MacDonald is condescending, Tolkien falls on the oppositeend—he neither explains nor instructs; and although his descriptions ofthe Faerian world remain discernible, the intentions or motives of itsinhabitants remain unclear.Tolkien’s Faery is most interesting for what it does not say. We meetthe elven mariners in medias res. XXXXXXXXy appear to be returning from battleand have evidently won (Smith 26), but whom they defeated or where theyare headed cannot be determined. Next, we behold the King’s Tree in allits glory, but know nothing about its purpose (28). It exists and its beautyrequires no explanation. Finally, Smith is responsible for awakening theWind, but what offence he has committed cannot be discerned—if hehas, in fact, done anything wrong (29-30). We are just as perplexed asSmith as we experience a world we do not fully understand—a worldwe are not meant to fully understand. After all, the text makes it plainthat there are things in Faery “which men know nothing” about (26).And by saying nothing, not explaining these matters, Tolkien is at oncesaying something—he is defending the world of Faery. In reaction toMacDonald, who inundated XXXXXXXX Golden Key with too much meaning andelucidation, Tolkien creates an Otherworld full of uncertainty. If there isone thing he is trying to get across, it is that Faery exists as a thing in itsown right and needs no other purpose than to delight and excite, whichit does for the reader and Smith alike.10XXXXXXXX imagery altogether overshadows the action of these scenes,giving the text more of a poetic feel. Tolkien’s paratactic style, use ofalliteration, and rhythmic repetition of the word “and” further heightensthe poetic element. Such stylistic preferences align these passages withBeowulf, which relies heavily on both alliterative meter and parataxis.My point is not that Tolkien had Beowulf in mind or that he was evenconsciously imitating the poem, but that Tolkien’s style contains both aheroic seriousness and poetic eloquence that harkens back to Old English verse. Syntactic parallelisms add to the overall rhythm and flow ofthese scenes (indentified below with brackets). And finally, Tolkien even133Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influenceemploys internal rhyme, such as “down to the ground” and “sun at noon”(consonantal rhyme).Elven Mariners EpisodeSuddenly they lifted up their voices in a song of triumph,[and his heart was shaken with fear], [and he fell upon hisface], [and they passed over him] [and went away into theechoing hills.] (Smith 26)King’s Tree EpisodeHe saw the King’s Tree springing up, tower upon tower,into the sky, and its light was like the sun at noon; and it boreat once leaves and flowers and fruits uncounted, and not onewas the same as any other that grew on the Tree. (Smith 28)Wind and Birch EpisodeAt once the breeze rose to a wild Wind, [roaring like a greatbeast], [and it swept him up] [and flung him on] the shore,[and it drove him up] the slopes whirling and [falling like adead leaf]. (Smith 29)Even when it seems that Tolkien has succumbed to triteness with suchsimiles as “like the sun at noon” and “like a dead leaf,” there is artisticintention in his selection. If understood within the context, the similesare not just appropriate but powerful. Leading up to the sun simile is adescription of the tree towering up into the sky; thus, it only makes sensethat the tree should be compared to the sun. XXXXXXXX sun simile does notdetract from our visual image but adds to it. XXXXXXXX tree is so overwhelmingin both size and radiance that it appears, if only for a moment, that it isnot merely like the sun but it is the sun. I think this is the image the passage is trying to evoke.XXXXXXXX leaf simile functions similarly. XXXXXXXX wind is so strong that Smithis not like a leaf as much as he is a leaf. This picture invokes reversepersonification, where the human takes on characteristics of an inanimate object. XXXXXXXXrefore, it is fitting that we find Smith clinging to the stemof a birch; he metaphorically becomes a leaf. What is more, the parallelsimile used to describe the wind as “a great beast” is not just syntacticallyanalogous; it is important to the scene; the wind is personified in thesame instance that Smith undergoes reverse personification.In addition to these visions of Faery that give the story more of anadult feel, Tolkien incorporated thematic elements that were geared towards adults. Just as MacDonald sought to establish a connection between children and his characters, Tolkien did likewise with adults by134Josh Longimbuing his text with a profound sense of bereavement—that inexplicable and inescapable feeling of loss that comes with old age.Tolkien frequently made reference to this element of Smith. In writing to Roger Lancelyn Green, he referred to the story as “an old man’sbook, already weighted with the presage of ‘bereavement’” (Letters 389).11XXXXXXXX story begins and ends with bereavement. After twenty-four years ofservice as Master Cook, Rider retires unexpectedly (Smith 9). Nevertheless, Rider is not the one left bereaved; he is almost too willing to give uphis position in order to return to Faery.12 XXXXXXXX townspeople are the onesmost affected by his sudden disappearance, which is, in a sense, a deathbecause he is never heard from or seen of again. XXXXXXXX main difference,however, is that the townspeople carp rather than mourn their loss (Smith9).In addition, we soon discover that this is not the whole story and thatthe history of Wootton Major goes all the way back to the birth of Rider.In Tolkien’s essay on Smith, he devotes a large portion of it to recountingthe events of Rider’s life, and from it, we learn that Rider was one wellacquainted with loss. Tolkien writes, “[Rider’s] sadness and ‘air of havinghis mind elsewhere’ [while he was Master Cook] was due no doubt notonly to his bereavement but also to this deprivation” (Smith 96). Rider’sbereavement is a result of the untimely death of his wife Rose, who diedwhile giving birth to their daughter Ella, Smith’s mother. To make matters worse, Rider’s position as Master Cook prevents him from visitingFaery, which is what Tolkien means by “this deprivation.” Though noneof these events take place in the published text, they assist in giving us afuller understanding of the bereavement that surrounds the narrative.Though the loss that begins the story (and back-story) is rich andcomplex, the bereavement that Smith endures at the end of the tale ismost profound. After meeting the Faery Queen and experiencing sometype of transcendence, Smith comes to the realization “that his way nowled back to bereavement” (Smith 39). XXXXXXXX next paragraph begins, “Thatmeeting-place was now far behind him, and here he was, walking amongthe fallen leaves, pondering all that he had seen and learned” (39). Thismoment of solitude, before he meets up with the Faery King and relinquishes his star, is remarkable for its subtlety—it says much withoutsaying a lot. XXXXXXXX outward setting becomes indicative of Smith’s inwardstruggle; the barrenness of his surroundings parallels his own internallandscape. Though he has not given up his star yet, he reflects on his pastexperiences and realizes that he does not have much time remaining. Hisencounter with the Faery Queen might very well be his final venture intoFaery.Smith reluctantly gives up the star. After he returns home, the full extent of his bereavement sets in: “His son lit candles, and for a while they135Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influencesat by the fire without speaking; for a great weariness and bereavementwas on the smith” (Smith 49). In “Suggestions for the ending of the story,”Tolkien explains Smith’s loss, which is to some extent his own, when hewrites, “A time comes for writers and artists, when invention and ‘vision’cease and they can only reflect on what they have seen and learned”(Smith 81). This quality of bereavement reemphasizes the adult natureof Smith. As a corrective swerve to MacDonald, Tolkien made his storyadult-like not only tonally and stylistically, but also thematically.Correcting the AllegoryXXXXXXXX question of allegory has been an important issue in Smith criticism. In fact, two of the top Tolkien scholars take almost opposite positions on this matter—Tom Shippey finds the text to be rich with allegorical meaning, while Verlyn Flieger argues that the work is better read asa fairy tale and valued as a thing in its own right (Shippey and Flieger186–200). Part of the problem lies in Tolkien’s own comments on thestory. In his Smith essay, he notes that it “is not an ‘allegory’, though itis capable of allegorical interpretations at certain points” (Smith 84). Heexplains this in greater detail in a letter sent to Kilby: “[Smith is] not anallegory (however applicable to this or that) in intention: certainly not inthe ‘Fay’ parts, and only fleetingly in the Human, where evidently XXXXXXXXCook and the Great Hall etc. represent XXXXXXXX Parson and Church andtheir decay” (quoted in Scull and Hammond, Reader’s Guide 40).13 At facevalue, Tolkien’s explanations seem incongruous, but his understandingof the “allegory” in Smith is reconcilable.It is important to begin by defining Tolkien’s terms. In his Smith essay,he makes a distinction between allegory and allegorical interpretations.What do these terms mean and how do they differ? Tolkien’s clearestdefinition of allegory can be found in his comments on Pearl in the Introduction to his translation of the poem. He writes, “To be an ‘allegory’ apoem must, and with fair consistency, describe in other terms some eventor process; its entire narrative and all its significant details should cohereand work together to this end” (18). Ultimately, Smith is not an allegorybecause the entire narrative does not work together to produce a fair andcomplete secondary meaning. For instance, the Faery King and Queenare not symbols of anything else, just as the elven mariners are elves andthe King’s Tree is a tree. XXXXXXXX sustained one-to-one correspondences aresimply not there.On the other hand, Smith “is capable of allegorical interpretationsat certain points.” But what does Tolkien mean by this? He explains theterm in a letter to Milton Waldman by distinguishing it from allegory:“[T]he more ‘life’ a story has the more readily will it be susceptible ofallegorical interpretations: while the better a deliberate allegory is made136Josh Longthe more nearly will it be acceptable just as a story” (Letters 145).Although allegory and allegorical interpretations appear similar,Tolkien makes it clear that they start out from opposite ends. Allegoryis a deliberate attempt on the part of the author to dominate the storyand reader’s mind; the secondary meaning is infused within the narrative framework. Allegorical interpretations, in contrast, arise as a readercomes into contact with a text. A story is imbued with so much life thatit begins to exhibit allegorical qualities, and the reader soon discovers anumber of symbolic elements.Tolkien makes a distinction between not only allegory and allegoricalinterpretations, but also the Faery and Human parts of Smith. He wasconcerned that the Faery would be interpreted allegorically and the literary belief would be lost or stifled. In his essay on Sir Gawain, he speaks of“los[ing] Faerie only to gain a formalized allegory” (MC 79). I think thisis what he feared with Smith—that readers would merely hunt for secondary meaning rather than endeavor to appreciate the story as a story. Itseems to me that if you are going to trust what Tolkien says about hiswork, you cannot feasibly interpret the Faery allegorically.Taken as a whole, Smith functions as a corrective swerve because XXXXXXXXGolden Key is an allegory and Smith is not. Furthermore, while Tolkien insisted that his story’s Faery remain free of allegorical interpretations, XXXXXXXXGolden Key’s Fairyland exists primarily to sustain its secondary meaning.XXXXXXXX allegory in XXXXXXXX Golden Key is plain; it is the story of Mossy andTangle’s journey to heaven. Mossy is an everyman just as John Bunyan’s Christian is one; the same is true of Tangle. Even the names ofthe two children hint at the depravity of humanity—that we are grimyand mixed-up. XXXXXXXX golden key may be taken to be salvation; after all, itis what allows Mossy and Tangle to enter heaven. MacDonald’s fairiesappear to represent angels, especially the aëranthes, who act as guardian angels for the two children—protecting, directing and guiding themalong their journey (13-14, 27, 45).Grandmother is a Christ-figure; she welcomes both children openlyand without reserve (14, 31). She emanates warmth and humility, and isresponsible for washing both Mossy and Tangle clean. She teaches andinstructs the children on various matters. In fact, at one point, her speechstrongly recalls Christ’s own words in the gospel of Matthew.Grandmother: “You must look for the keyhole. That is yourwork. I cannot help you. I can only tell you that if you lookfor it you will find it” (31).Matthew 7:7: “Seek and you will find; knock and the doorwill be opened to you.”137Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of InfluenceBoth passages not only emphasize seeking and finding but also containdoor imagery.Despite these allegorical parallels, the clearest indication that XXXXXXXXGolden Key is an allegory comes in the Platonic vision the children encounter when they enter the Valley of Shadows. MacDonald transformsPlato’s Allegory of the Cave into a profoundly Christian model. Heavenbecomes the ultimate reality, while this world and its shadows are a mereglimpse of eternity. It is only after seeing the world for what it truly is thatthe children experience a moment of epiphany. “After sitting for a while,each, looking up, saw the other in tears: they were each longing after thecountry whence the shadows fell” (41). For the rest of the story, the twochildren seek to find this place.Shortly after this, Mossy and Tangle are separated—which suggeststhat death has cut them off from one another (42). We follow Tangle formost of the remaining portion of the story as she journeys through apurgatorial realm, encountering the Old Man of the Sea, the Old Manof the Earth, and the Old Man of the Fire (45-65). Each Old Man represents a process of cleansing, purging, and refining that Tangle mustundergo to attain eternal life. Mossy only has to face the Old Man ofthe Earth before he is directed to heaven. XXXXXXXX story ends with Mossyand Tangle reuniting, opening a door with the golden key, ascending astaircase, and then entering into a rainbow, which is obviously heaven(73-78).Unlike XXXXXXXX Golden Key, Smith’s allegorical content is positioned in theHuman part of the story. Though Tolkien’s own allegorical interpretation of the Master Cook and the Great Hall can be found in the text,this reading is ineffective because it is too subtle—besides the author,no one else was able to detect its presence. XXXXXXXX most obvious allegoricalinterpretation of Smith relates to the cake, fairy queen, and Nokes, whichseems to me to be a commentary on MacDonald and his art.Before I develop this allegorical interpretation, I would like to makeseveral prefatory comments. Firstly, as Tom Shippey has pointed out inregarded to his own allegorical reading of Smith: “[A]t the more advancedstages of reading an allegory, it is not essential to come up with the onesingle correct solution. . . . A suggestive or a provocative one will do”(Author 298).Secondly, it cannot be overstated just how much Tolkien came to dislike MacDonald towards the end of his life. His own statements confirmthis, but even more compelling is the first-hand account we get from Kilby: “[Tolkien] said he had found MacDonald terrible and his broadsidecriticism of him implied that nothing he had written was worthwhile”(Tolkien 36-7).Finally, it should be noted that I am not the first commentator to view138Josh LongNokes as a MacDonald-figure. Kilby suggests that Nokes “may representMacDonald” because he could make a cake that was appealing on theoutside, but had no idea of what went into making a Great one (Tolkien37). Margaret Sammons also finds Nokes to be a MacDonald-figure. Sheobserves, “Tolkien is perhaps saying that MacDonald believes Faerie ismerely something sweet and funny and has little notion of what to putinside a great Tale” (4).It is no mere accident that Nokes is the antagonist of the story, nor isit by chance that his name means fool. Also, he is the only character whouses the modern form fairy—the very spelling MacDonald uses in XXXXXXXXGolden Key. Though this spelling is not unique to MacDonald, there areother passages in Smith that clearly tie Nokes to him. Nokes’ descriptionof the fairy queen as “a tricky little creature” (Smith 15) strongly recallsMacDonald’s portrayal of the “little creatures” who “play [the maids]all manner of uncomfortable tricks” (Golden 10-11). In addition, after thechildren finish eating their cake, Nokes exclaims, “Bless me! XXXXXXXXn [thestar] can’t have been made of silver after all; it must have melted. Orperhaps Mr. Prentice was right and it was really magical, and it’s justvanished and gone back to Fairyland. Not a nice trick to play, I don’tthink” (Smith 18). Nokes is the only character to use the term “Fairyland,”which is the term MacDonald uses throughout XXXXXXXX Golden Key. Moreover,in this passage, Nokes reemphasizes the tricky nature of fairies. Even thefact that Nokes insists that fairy is funny is an idea put forth in XXXXXXXX GoldenKey—MacDonald’s fairies accidentally make Tangle laugh (Golden 12).Clearly, Nokes is a somewhat satirical portrait of MacDonald.Just as Nokes is analogous to MacDonald, his fairy queen is modeled after MacDonald’s fairies—the aëranth. MacDonald’s aëranth is described as “a lovely little creature in human shape, with large white wings”(Golden 26), and “a beautiful little creature with wings” (45). Nokes’ fairyqueen is depicted quite similarly as “a little doll . . . dressed all in white,with a little wand in her hand” (Smith 11) and “a tiny white figure on onefoot like a snow-maiden dancing” (14). Both are diminutive, white, andpretty. Moreover, each contains a traditional characteristic of the littlefairy—wings and a wand respectively. Nokes’ fairy is plainly an exaggerated caricature of MacDonald’s aëranth.Tolkien was so opposed to the idea of fairy littleness that he satirizedit by having Nokes fill his cake with an excessive number of small artifacts. It is not just the queen and her wand that are small, but little trinketsand coins are mixed into the batter, and little trees and a small mountainare placed on the outside. Nokes includes all of these because he assumes that “it amuses the children” (Smith 13). Tolkien is commentingon MacDonald’s art; he felt MacDonald had geared his “Great Cake” towhat he perceived was the reach of children’s tastes, and by doing so, he139Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influencehad produced a work that was overly sweet, petty, and inadequate. It is nowonder that only two of the twenty-four children at the feast are vocallyexcited about the cake, and after it is passed out, there is “nothing leftover: no coming again” (18). Moreover, Nokes’ cake does not go downin history. “Indeed it is said that [Nokes] just made his century: the onlymemorable thing he ever achieved” (Smith 59, emphasis added).Although most commentators have indentified Smith as a Tolkienfigure, few have discussed Smith as a child. This portion of the story fits,if with more work, into my reading. Tolkien “grew up on” MacDonald,as Lewis puts it (Collected Letters 2: 96). In other words, MacDonald wasone of Tolkien’s first encounters with Fairy. My allegorical interpretation suddenly takes on autobiographical implications. Although Nokes’cake had mostly failed, it did contain a “glimpse” of Faery (i.e. the star)as the Queen alludes to later. It was this inspiration that eventually ledTolkien to true Faery. When Tolkien writes in his abandoned Introduction to XXXXXXXX Golden Key, “Some one may meet them [the marvels of Fairy]for the first time in his silly tale, and catch a glimpse of Fairy and go onto better things” (Smith 74), he is likely recounting his own history withMacDonald.Tessera: Redeeming the Word through Antithetical CompletionTolkien’s clinamen affected the larger elements of Smith—the story’stone and themes, and the positioning and use of allegory, but Tolkien’stessera shaped the smaller elements of the story—the words. Bloom describes this revisionary ratio thus: “A poet antithetically ‘completes’ hisprecursor, by so reading the parent-poem as to retain its terms but tomean them in another sense, as though the precursor had failed to gofar enough” (14). This ratio, even more so than clinamen, works well withTolkien because of the nature of his profession. As a philologist andwordsmith, he was naturally concerned with words and their meanings.If there is one word that Tolkien was trying to redeem from MacDonald,it was certainly the word fairy.14In Smith, the first indication that Tolkien was attempting a tessera isseen in the fact that he includes a different spelling of the word. Fliegerobserves,He felt that the word fairy as conventionally used in modernEnglish had been debased, and divorced from its originalcomplex and powerful meaning. He chose the older spellings[Faërie, Fayery, and Faery] to dissociate the word from itsmodern connotations of prettiness, delicacy, and diminutivestature, and return it to the older, considerably darker meanings it once had had. (Smith 143)140Josh LongIn Smith, Tolkien settled on Faery; all of the characters use this form except Nokes (Smith 143). This was by no means the first time that Tolkienemployed this spelling. As early as 1915, he used it in his poem “XXXXXXXXShores of Faëry” (Lost Tales II 271-2). Nevertheless, this does not negateor lessen his tessera. He included this spelling in Smith primarily to juxtapose it to MacDonald’s fairy.Although Tolkien retained MacDonald’s word, his understanding ofthe term was antithetically different. This is seen most clearly in both authors’ depictions of fairies. In XXXXXXXX Golden Key, MacDonald’s fairies do notplay a major role. Nonetheless, they are described and do serve a purposein inadvertently prompting Tangle towards Fairyland. In addition, theyalso serve as guides once the children are there. MacDonald introducesthem in this fashion: “Now it is well known that the little creatures commonlycalled fairies, though there are many different kinds of fairies in Fairyland,have an exceeding dislike to untidiness. Indeed, they are quite spiteful toslovenly people” (10-11, emphasis added). In contrast, Tolkien describesthe Faery Queen: “She wore no crown and had no throne. She stoodthere in her majesty and her glory, and all about her was a great hostshimmering and glittering like the stars above; but she was taller than thepoints of their great spears, and upon her head there burned a white flame”(Smith 36-7, emphasis added). XXXXXXXX most apparent difference between thetwo is physical size; however, I think Tolkien’s understanding of Faeries is distinct in other ways as well. XXXXXXXX Faery Queen’s splendor causeshumanity (Smith) to tremble in her presence—one might say she is justshort of divinity. MacDonald’s fairies pale in comparison—they are mischievous at best. Leaving the maids with bruises, they are just short ofhilarity. In fact, his fairies are so incompetent that the first time they try tomake Tangle run away from home they actually cause her to laugh (12).In addition, it is also worth noting how both authors approach theirfairies. Typical of MacDonald, he utilizes them as an instrument forinstruction. Clearly appealing to his Victorian sensibilities, he stresses theneed for cleanliness and tidiness. In a way, his juvenile audience is beingfrightened into keeping their rooms and/or appearances clean becausethe assumption is if they do not, bad fairies will come and harass them.In keeping with the tone of the rest of the story, this passage reemphasizes MacDonald’s didactic proclivity, which often carries to the point ofcondescension. In this way, his fairies are not just inferior to Tolkien’s;they are insignificant in and of themselves; they exist as mere children’sprops and contain none of the terror or beauty that Tolkien believed wasa necessary part of their tradition.Tolkien, on the other hand, uses the Faery Queen to exemplify andre-establish the concept of terrifying beauty—something he believed hadbeen lost in modern times. In “On Fairy-stories,” he writes, “XXXXXXXX fear of141Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influencethe beautiful fay that ran through the elder ages almost eludes our grasp”(MC 151). Furthermore, the seriousness of the situation is apparent; unlike MacDonald, Tolkien values his Faeries and suggests that they shouldbe feared, not laughed at. In fact, the same awe-inspiring trepidation thatthe Faery Queen instills in Smith can also be seen in the elven mariners,when Smith first encounters them (Smith 26-27), and Alf, when he revealshimself as the King of Faery (58). Moreover, both the elven marinersand Alf are described as tall (26, 39, 58). Tolkien was determined toantithetically complete MacDonald’s word by making his Faeries tall andterrifying.XXXXXXXX final difference between the two fairies is that Tolkien’s Faeriesradically affect the primary world—they improve it. MacDonald’s fairiesmay be concerned with keeping the primary world tidy, but they are notvery good at it, and ultimately, their contribution is of no real significance.In contrast, Alf transforms the town of Wootton Major. Towards the endof the story, we learn that “the Hall had been re-glazed and re-painted”(Smith 46). This renovation—the decoration of the Great Hall—is surelysomething Alf is responsible for. Just as Smith’s life was enriched by thefay-star, the town of Wootton Major is forever changed by Alf ’s presence.Though his Faerian adornment appears to some as new, it is actually areturn to a forgotten but important tradition—which allows more thanjust the smith to come into contact with Faery.In juxtaposition to Nokes’s cake at the beginning of the tale, whichleaves only a couple of children outwardly excited, the story closes withAlf ’s Great Cake. It is important and appropriate that this cake enthusesall the children. “XXXXXXXX children all laughed and clapped” (Smith 61). Tolkien is again commenting on the superiority of his own art and the inferiority of MacDonald’s, but the real point is that the children have nowcaught a glimpse of Faery. After Alf departs, the narrator notes that thetown “kept the Hall gilded and painted in memory of Alf ” (62). Alf hasleft a lasting impression on the children and adults alike—this is something Nokes could never do.In the end, Tolkien’s tessera was not so much a turning away as areturning to; like Alf ’s renovation of the Hall, Tolkien was looking tothe past to restore the present. He expressed this most poignantly in aninterview he gave to William Cater on the 2 August 1966. “By writingabout elves as tall as men I am restoring tradition, trying to rescue theword from the nursery” (10).15 For him, the world of Faery and the wordFaery were so intricately and inextricably connected that in order to dojustice to the former, one first had to have a proper understanding ofthe latter. For Tolkien, MacDonald had failed in his depiction of fairiesbecause he did not have an accurate conception of them—he was misusing them for children and misrepresenting them as small—in size as wellas significance.142Josh LongXXXXXXXX Anxiety of MacDonaldTolkien’s relationship with MacDonald is complex because althoughhe read him as a child and praised his stories as an adult, he grew to despise him later in life. Even so, he recognized that MacDonald did affecthis imagination. In a rejected beginning to “On Fairy-stories,” he asserts,“For me at any rate fairy-stories are especially associated with Scotland. . . by reason of the names of Andrew Lang and George MacDonald.To them in different ways I owe the books which most affected the background of my imagination since childhood” (quoted in Scull and Hammond, Reader’s Guide 567, ellipsis in original).16Undoubtedly, MacDonald exerted some influence on him as a writer. In a 1954 letter to Naomi Mitchison, he explained, “[Orcs] are notbased on direct experience of mine; but owe, I suppose, a good deal tothe goblin tradition . . . especially as it appears in George MacDonald”(Letters 178).17 In 1958, he acknowledged in a letter to Mrs. L.M. Cuttsthat his Ents contained “perhaps some remote influence from GeorgeMacDonald’s [sic] Phantastes (a work I do not actually much like)” (TolkienOn Fairy-stories 207). Although he recognized that he owed some minorinfluence to MacDonald, there is a hesitancy about his admission, as ifhe was not quite willing to acknowledge his debt. Carpenter tells anotherstory that confirms much the same,I did once suggest to [Tolkien], one of the few conversationsI remember having with him myself, that XXXXXXXX Princess and theGoblin [by MacDonald] has certain resemblances to XXXXXXXX Hobbit. Beneath the mountain in both books there are goblinsmining, and he was, I think, momentarily disconcerted bythis suggestion and did admit that there might have beensome very slight influence there, a memory from childhood,but no conscious influences. (Carpenter, Sayer and Kilby17)What this reveals is that although Tolkien was willing to admit to trivialinfluences, deep down inside he was anxious about MacDonald. Bloomwrites,XXXXXXXX poet in every reader does not experience the same disjunction from what he reads that the critic in every reader necessarily feels. What gives pleasure to the critic in a reader maygive anxiety to the poet in him, an anxiety we have learned,as readers, to neglect, to our own loss and peril. This anxiety,this mode of melancholy, is the anxiety of influence. (25)That Tolkien was plagued by this type of anxiety is quite evident. George143Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of InfluenceSayer recalls, “On the whole, Tolkien was, even then, not inclined to admit to the influence on him of any other writers at all” (Carpenter, Sayerand Kilby 15). Carpenter more specifically observes, “Tolkien, like Lewis,knew MacDonald’s children’s stories during his own childhood. He laterrepudiated any influence of MacDonald’s along with repudiating the influence of practically everybody else” (Carpenter, Sayer and Kilby 17).Kilby asserts, “It looked to me as if he had used MacDonald and verymuch didn’t want to confess it—it was a strange thing. It wouldn’t havemade any difference if he did” (Carpenter, Sayer and Kilby 17).Yet it would have made all the difference according to Bloom. Hesuggests, “Poets as poets cannot accept substitutions, and fight to theend to have their initial chance alone” (8).18 Tolkien’s insistent denialof influence was a defense mechanism, a way of maintaining his ownpoetic vision; his very existence as a writer depended on it. In fact, forhim to admit to the influence of MacDonald essentially meant he was alesser writer. “Where generosity is involved,” proposes Bloom, “the poetsinfluenced are minor or weaker; the more generosity, and the more mutual it is, the poorer the poets involved” (30). This is a relatively modernview of literature, which has not always been prevalent. Kilby providesa good account of our contemporary understanding: “Today we featurethe ‘star’ and tend to become more enamored of a name than of anaccomplishment. We also worship utter originality to the point of eccentricity and regard literary indebtedness as shameful. XXXXXXXXse things werenot always so” (“Tolkien as Scholar” 9). In fact, the meaning of “original” as new or without imitation did not emerge until midway throughthe neoclassical period. XXXXXXXX OED records that Joseph Warton was thefirst to use this word in this sense. In his 1757 work Essay on the Genius andWritings of Pope, he writes of the “new and original images” of Thomson(42), praises Dante’s “sublime and original poem” (190), and acknowledges that while Pope was “a most excellent improver,” he was “no greatoriginal inventor” (298).For the medieval writer, the word carried an entirely different meaning—it was much more connected with its root word “origin.” WhenGower alludes to “the lawe original” (Confessio Amantis), he is talkingabout the first and most perfect law. In XXXXXXXX Legend of Good Women, whenChaucer writes, “Ye gete no more of me, but ye wil rede / Thoriginal[the original], that telleth al the cas,” he is referring back to an earlierwork, most likely Ovid’s Heroides (Skeat 171). “Original” had nothing todo with novelty, and in terms of literature, it actually consisted of usinga precursor’s material. In her book Absent Narratives, Manuscript Textuality, and Literary Structure in Late Medieval England, Elizabeth Scala observes,“A medieval definition of ‘originality,’ then, would call attention to theorigins from which a story comes. Originality in the Middle Ages points144Josh Longtoward tradition rather than innovation, even as its literary productionsbegin approaching such novelty” (3).19Although Tolkien was a medievalist, he did not subscribe to the medieval understanding of “original.” Like most of his contemporaries, hefought to preserve his own creative enterprise—a vision that was uniquely and wholly his own. According to Bloom, in a poet’s attempt to pursuehis own artistic ends, he inevitably becomes engrossed in his own creation. Bloom posits, “Poets, by the time they have grown strong, do notread the poetry of X, for really strong poets can read only themselves.For them, to be judicious is to be weak, and to compare, exactly andfairly, is to be not elect” (19). Such a self-focused approach is indicative ofthe strong poet. In his pursuit after greatness, he becomes solely devotedto and completely consumed by his own work.Tolkien faced such a poetic dilemma. In writing to C. S. Lewis inJanuary 1948, he admitted, “I have something that I deeply desire tomake, and which it is the (largely frustrated) bent of my nature to make.Without any vanity or exaggerated notion of the universal importanceof this, it remains a fact that other things are to me less important” (Letters126-7). Tolkien is, of course, referring to XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, or moregenerally, his mythology as whole. He began XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings in December 1937, XXXXXXXX Silmarillion about two decades earlier; at this pointin his life, both remained unpublished and unfinished. Surely, Tolkienhad grown preoccupied with his own poetic aim. Other things were tohim far less important than his own making. About two decades later, hewould reaffirm himself as a strong poet in an interview.I think I was born with what you might call an inventivemind, and the books that have remained in my mind remainas those things which I acquired and don’t really seem muchlike the book itself. For instance, I now find that I can’t standGeorge McDonald’s books at any price at all. I find that nowI can’t take him. XXXXXXXX same with most books that I’ve read. (quotedin Resnik 40, emphasis added)Tolkien reiterated this in yet another interview: “In any case, I don’t readmuch now, not even fairy-stories. And then I’m always looking for something I can’t find. Something like what I wrote myself ” (quoted in Plimmer 35). In his mind, all other books paled in comparison to his own. Hedid “not read the poetry of X” because he could “read only” himself(Bloom 19).Much of Tolkien’s denial of influence stems from his anxiety over it.Like many writers before him, he believed that originality was a naturalbyproduct of literary greatness. He offers up this very notion in Smith:“It was expected that the Great Cake should have something novel and145Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influencesurprising about it and not be a mere repetition of the one before” (11).This is as much a comment about his own art as it is MacDonald’s. Tolkien had indubitably been influenced by MacDonald, but he could notaccept this. He had poured himself into his fiction—it was rightfully his,and he did not want to have his own poetic vision confused with that ofMacDonald’s. Bloom rhetorically asks, “For what strong maker desiresthe realization that he has failed to create himself ?” (5). Tolkien definitelyfelt this tension. His hostility toward MacDonald was as much a result ofanxiety as disgust; he feared that others would associate him with a writerhe now considered inferior.In fact, some of the very criticisms Tolkien made about MacDonaldcan be found in Tolkien’s own early work. XXXXXXXX Hobbit, for example, contains the same kind of patronizing tone that Tolkien accused MacDonaldof using. He told Philip Norman on 9 August 1966,‘XXXXXXXX Hobbit’ was written in what I should now regard as badstyle, as if one were talking to children. XXXXXXXXre’s nothing mychildren loathed more. XXXXXXXXy taught me a lesson. Anythingthat in any way marked out ‘XXXXXXXX Hobbit’ as for children instead of just for people, they disliked—instinctively. I did too,now that I think about it. All this ‘I won’t tell you any more,you think about it’ stuff. Oh no, they loathe it; it’s awful.(100)In addition, “Goblin Feet,” one of Tolkien’s earliest published poems, isswarming with little fairy-creatures.20 In 1971, he denounced the piecealtogether when he insisted, “I wish the unhappy little thing, representing all that I came (so soon after) to fervently dislike, could be buried forever” (quoted in Lost Tales I 32). Clearly, Tolkien had derived his initialideas about fairies and fairy tales from MacDonald and his contemporaries. As he told W. H. Auden in a 1955 letter: “[XXXXXXXX Hobbit] has some ofthe sillinesses of manner caught unthinkingly from the kind of stuff I hadhad served to me” (Letters 215). Another reason Tolkien was so disparaging towards MacDonald was because he had exhibited an influence onTolkien that had tarnished his own early writing.It was through XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings that Tolkien first broke away fromhis “Poetic Father” (Bloom 42), but Tolkien’s corrective movement andturning were not fully actualized until Smith. As a reactionary piece, Smithallowed Tolkien “to clear imaginative space” for himself (Bloom 5); itprovided him with a chance at “something novel” (Smith 11). MacDonaldhad failed to live up to Tolkien’s staunch standards and pedantic expectations. XXXXXXXXre is an obvious air of superiority in Tolkien’s swerve and completion—it is that MacDonald was wrong and would have done betterhad he been more like Tolkien. Bloom suggests, “XXXXXXXX stronger the man,146Josh Longthe larger his resentments, and the more brazen his clinamen” (43). Evidently, Tolkien must have contained a considerable amount of strength.Epilogue: A Brief Defense of MacDonaldIt must be remembered that Tolkien was “a man of limited sympathies” and that his “taste [was] not normal” (Letters 349, 34). We shouldbe slow to adopt his dislikes, especially those he acquired late in life whenhis opinions on various matters changed substantially. Despite Tolkien’smany severe criticisms of XXXXXXXX Golden Key, it remains an extremely movingstory. Like Lewis’s Narnian Chronicles, XXXXXXXX Golden Key’s greatest strengthlies in its ability to speak to children while at the same time, commenton deeper spiritual truths. All the same, the story’s Fairy is fantasticalenough that it can be read and reread without ever taking any noticeof its allegorical content. It captures the imagination and raptures thereader into an Otherworld full of beauty and mystery.XXXXXXXX most profound scene occurs when Mossy and Tangle enter theValley of Shadows. This passage is attractive in a number of ways. First,the description of the barren landscape teeming with shadows is captivating; as a reader, you are drawn in, yet you hesitantly fear the strangeness.Such vivid description recalls some of Smith’s own poignant adventures.MacDonald is at his best when he simply describes rather than explains.Second, the children’s sorrowful realization that they are longing for afar off country speaks powerfully to the human condition because we allhave at one time or another longed for something beyond ourselves orsituation. Third, MacDonald places himself in a larger intellectual context by combining Plato’s metaphysics with Christian theology. In short,the allegory satisfies the literary critics; the Platonism satisfies the philosophers; and the Christian theology satisfies the theologians.NOTESI AM GRATEFULTO THE EDITORIALSTAFF OF Tolkien Studies—Douglas A. Anderson, Michael D. C. Drout, and Verlyn Flieger—for reading overmy article numerous times and providing me with detailed criticism.I would also like to thank the anonymous reader for his or her excellent feedback. Diana Pavlac Glyer and David Bratman, thanks forgiving my article a final read. And finally, I’d like to thank my wife forher support, encouragement, and assistance.1 Sammons notes, “As Tolkien explained in an unpublished letter toProfessor Clyde Kilby, the story evolved quite by accident” (4).2 XXXXXXXX thesis is entitled XXXXXXXX Fairy Tales and Fantasies of George MacDonaldby Mary M. McEldowney (Scull and Hammond, Chronology 174).147Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of Influence3 See also Scull and Hammond (Chronology 625).4 Glyer defines negative influence as “a situation where one work iscreated in deliberate opposition to another” (37).5 C. S. Lewis was known to his close friends and family as “Jack.”6 It is true that in Tolkien’s original assessment of XXXXXXXX Golden Key he didnot perceive that it was a children’s story. In a note to “On Fairy-stories,” he writes that it “is not for children though children do read itwith pleasure” (Tolkien On Fairy-stories 250).7 See also Scull and Hammond (Reader’s Guide 570).8 Although in this quote Tolkien mentions Phantastes rather than XXXXXXXXGolden Key, he plainly understood the latter to be an allegory as well.In his notes to “On Fairy-stories,” he specifies that it was “constructedwith consc[ious] alleg[ory]” (quoted in Scull and Hammond Reader’sGuide 570).9 Tolkien once wrote, “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings was a deliberate attempt towrite a large-scale adult fairy-story” (quoted in Manlove 158). Thisquotation is taken from a letter dated 8 February 1967 to C. N. Manlove.10 Many of the ideas presented in this section owe a great deal to Flieger’s discussion of Smith in her article “XXXXXXXX Footsteps of Ælfwine”(196).11 See also Carpenter (244).12 Though it can be inferred from the narrative that Rider returns toFaery after he leaves Wootton Major, Tolkien makes it plain in hisessay that Rider “went back to Walton, where by the ‘entrance’ longfamiliar to him, he could enter Faery, but live and end his days amonghis wife’s kin” (Smith 99).13 See also Smith (70, 99-100) and Scull and Hammond (Reader’s Guide945).14 Bloom asserts, “XXXXXXXX tessera represents any later poet’s attempt topersuade himself (and us) that the precursor’s Word would be wornout if not redeemed as a newly fulfilled and enlarged Word of theephebe” (67).15 John D. Rateliff notes, “XXXXXXXX usage in XXXXXXXX Book of Lost Tales establishes‘fairy’ as a synonym for ‘elf ’” (59). I have found this to be the casein “On Fairy-stories” as well, where Tolkien writes, “Fairy, as a noun148Josh Longmore or less equivalent to elf, is a relatively modern word” (MC 112).Moreover, the fact that he gives the Faery King the name Alf (Elf)reaffirms this interpretation.16 See also Scull and Hammond (Reader’s Guide 277).17 See also Letters (185). For a more detailed discussion of MacDonald’sinfluence on Tolkien’s Orcs, see Rateliff (140-141) and Green (69-71).18 Later, Bloom adds, “A poet’s stance, his Word, his imaginative identity, his whole being, must be unique to him, and remain unique, or hewill perish, as a poet” (71).19 C. S. Lewis observes, “One is tempted to say that almost the typicalactivity of the medieval author consists in touching up somethingthat was already there; as Chaucer touched up Boccaccio, as Malorytouched up French prose romances which themselves touched upearlier romances in verse, as La3amon works over Wace, who worksover Geoffrey, who works over no one knows what. We are inclinedto wonder how men could be at once so original that they handledno predecessor without pouring new life into him, and so unoriginal that they seldom did anything completely new” (Discarded 209). Acouple pages later, he concludes, “XXXXXXXX originality which we regard asa sign of wealth might have seemed to them a confession of poverty”(211).20 Scull and Hammond write, “Some of [Tolkien’s] earliest writings,such as the poems Goblin Feet and XXXXXXXX Princess Ní, portray similar diminutive beings, and it was his intention in XXXXXXXX Book of Lost Talesthat in the future the Elves would actually fade and diminish andbecome transparent, and so become the ‘fairies’ as commonly conceived” (Reader’s Guide 280). Rateliff references “Goblin Feet,” “XXXXXXXXPrincess Ni,” and “Tinfang Warble” as early examples of poetry inwhich Tolkien depicts little fairies. He claims, “Tolkien later came todisavow the idea of elves as cute little fairies and moved his own elvesfirmly in the direction of medieval elf-lore; the Rivendell episodes inXXXXXXXX Hobbit mark virtually its last appearance in the ‘main line’ of hislegendarium” (120).WORKS CITEDBloom, Harold. XXXXXXXX Anxiety of Influence: A XXXXXXXXory of Poetry. London: Oxford University Press, 1975.149Clinamen, Tessera, and the Anxiety of InfluenceCarpenter, Humphrey. Tolkien: A Biography. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,2000.———, George Sayer, and Clyde Kilby. “A Dialogue.” Minas Tirith Evening-Star, 9 no. 2 (January 1980): 14-18.Cater, William. “Lord of the Hobbits.” Daily Express, 22 November 1966:10.Flieger, Verlyn. “XXXXXXXX Footsteps of Ælfwine.” In Tolkien’s Legendarium: Essays on XXXXXXXX History of Middle-earth, ed. Verlyn Flieger and Carl F.Hostetter. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2000: 183-198.Glyer, Diana Pavlac, and Kilby, Clyde S.. XXXXXXXX Company XXXXXXXXy Keep: C. S.Lewis and J.R.R. Tolkien as Writers in Community. Kent, OH: KentState University Press, 2007.Green, William H. XXXXXXXX Hobbit: A Journey into Maturity. New York: TwaynePublishers, 1995.Hammond, Wayne G., and Christina Scull. XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings: A Reader’s Companion. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2005.Kilby, Clyde. Tolkien and XXXXXXXX Silmarillion. Wheaton, IL: Harold Shaw,1976.———. “Tolkien as a Scholar and Artist.” Tolkien Journal, 3 no. 1 (1967):9-11.Lewis, C. S. XXXXXXXX Collected Letters of C. S. Lewis. Ed. Walter Hooper. 3 vols.London: HarperCollins, 2000-07.———. XXXXXXXX Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval and Renaissance Literature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1964.MacDonald, George. XXXXXXXX Golden Key. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1967.Manlove, C. N. Modern Fantasy: Five Studies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975.Norman, Philip. “XXXXXXXX Prevalence of Hobbits.” New York Times Magazine,15 January 1967: 30-31, 97, 100, 102. http://www.nytimes.com/1967/01/15/books/tolkien-interview.html [Accessed 12February 2005].Plimmer, Charlotte, and Denis. “XXXXXXXX Man Who Understands Hobbits.”XXXXXXXX Daily Telegraph Magazine, 22 March 1968: 31-32, 35.150Josh LongRateliff, John D. XXXXXXXX History of XXXXXXXX Hobbit Part One: Mr. Baggins. London:HarperCollins, 2007.Ringel, Faye. “Women Fantasists: In the Shadow of the Ring.” In J.R.R.Tolkien and His Literary Resonances: Views of Middle-earth, ed. GeorgeClark and Daniel Timmons. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press,2000: 159-171.Resnik, Henry. “An Interview with Tolkien.” Niekas 18 (Spring 1967): 37-47.Sammons, Margaret. “Tolkien on Fantasy in Smith of Wootton Major.”Mythlore 12 no. 1 (whole no. 43; Autumn 1985): 3-7, 37.Scala, Elizabeth. Absent Narratives, Manuscript Textuality, and Literary Structurein Late Medieval England. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.Scull, Christina, and Wayne G. Hammond. XXXXXXXX J.R.R. Companion & Guide:Chronology. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2006.———. XXXXXXXX J.R.R. Companion & Guide: Reader’s Guide. Boston: HoughtonMifflin, 2006.Shippey, Tom. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2002.———, and Verlyn Flieger. “Allegory versus Bounce: Tolkien’s Smith ofWootton Major.” Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts 12 no. 2 (wholeno. 46; 2001): 186-200.Skeat, Walter W., ed. Chaucer: XXXXXXXX Legend of Good Women. By GeoffreyChaucer. Whitefish, MT: Kessinger Publishing, 2006.151Tolkien’s texts copyright ©2009 XXXXXXXX Tolkien TrustCopyright © West Virginia University PressXXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will inMiddle-earthVERLYN FLIEGERIt is nothing less than an attempt to justify God’s creation ofan imperfect world filled with suffering, loss, and grief.—John Garth, Tolkien and the Great WarDuring December and January of 1916-17, the very middle and depths of World War I, the young J.R.R. Tolkien, newly returnedto England from the carnage of the Somme, began to write his great legendarium, the Silmarillion. This was intended to supply what Tolkien feltwas missing from his country’s literary pre-history, an indigenous English (not British) mythology on the order of the Finnish Kalevala and theIcelandic Eddas. He envisioned this ambitious project as “a more or lessconnected body of legend” ranging from the “large and cosmogonic” tothe level of “romantic fairy-story” (Letters 144). In the process of creatinghis mythology, however, Tolkien did more than color in a blank space;he invented a cosmology whose operation depends on a paradox, a challenging teleological contradiction.XXXXXXXX contradiction resides in the simultaneous presence in his invented world of two opposing principles, fate and free will, imagined as operating side by side, sometimes in conflict, sometimes interdependent. XXXXXXXXteleology provides that this paradox, established at the beginning in hismyth’s Creation narrative, will accomplish its end in both senses of thatword—both as purpose and as completion—as described in the epigraphat the head of this article. XXXXXXXX challenge arises when fate and free willintersect, for this collision of mutually contradictive forces engenders acognitive disjunction that works against readers’ acceptance of its operation in the Secondary World.XXXXXXXX trouble lies not with free will, but with fate. Readers who assume (and most do) that characters in Tolkien’s invented world are freeto choose, find the opposing notion that they are predestined hard to accept. And the idea that both principles are concurrently at work (and apparently at odds) is a concept even harder to encompass. It is, nevertheless, a concept integral to a mythology whose overarching scheme is thatfate, conceived as a kind of divinely inspired and celestially orchestratedmusic, governs the created world—with one exception. Of all Middleearth’s sentient species, the race of Men (including Hobbits) is the only152Verlyn Fliegergroup given the “virtue” to “shape their lives” beyond the scope of thismusic In contradistinction, the otherwise generally similar race of Elves,(both races being the Children of [the godhead] Ilúvatar) is, togetherwith the rest of Creation, ruled by fate.A Green SunIn its apparent impossibility of reconciliation, this fate/free will dichotomy is what in his essay “On Fairy-stories” Tolkien termed a “greensun.” That is to say, it is an element, a feature, or aspect intentionallycontrary to the Primary world but essential and formative in the Secondary one. XXXXXXXX concept goes to the heart of what he called “sub-creation,”the making of a believable imaginary world. “Anyone,” he wrote, “cansay the green sun. Many can then imagine or picture it.” But neither thephrase nor the striking image it evokes is by itself enough to make hispoint, and Tolkien went on to explain what more would be necessary.“To make a Secondary World in which the green sun will be credible,” hewrote, “commanding Secondary Belief, will probably require labour andthought, and will certainly demand a special skill, a kind of elvish craft”(MC 140).Labour and thought he most certainly gave it, as well as applying hisown elvish craft, which was considerable. Yet for many even of his mostdevoted admirers, this departure of Tolkien’s Secondary World from thelaws or principles of the Primary World is not just a green sun, it is onegreen sun too many, putting a breaking strain on Secondary Belief already stretched by accepting Elves, Hobbits, talking eagles and walkingtrees. Perhaps for that reason it has been largely ignored in the search forthe keys to his cosmology. XXXXXXXX assumption that either of the principlesin question by definition obviates the other has tended to conceal thisparticular green sun, so that most readers seem disposed to look past itrather than at it. Like Poe’s purloined letter, it is hidden in plain sight,openly displayed but easily overlooked.Readerly inattention notwithstanding, this green sun is not only anecessary and formative feature of Tolkien’s Secondary World, it is thevery mechanism by which it operates. In the Primary World the relativegovernance of fate or free will has been for millennia a topic for debateamong philosophers and theologians, who argue the extent to whicheither factor may be in force. Tolkien had the daring and freedom ofimagination to envision a world wherein both are co-existent, simultaneously in operation and co-operation.1 So far as I am aware, this vision isunique in modern fantasy.2Its uniqueness, however, is just what fosters its invisibility and permitsscholars rather to view his cosmology through the lens of this or thatmore familiar and thus more readily perceived real-world philosophical153XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earthsystem.3 XXXXXXXX impulse to associate the unconventional with the familiaris not unlike that of early genre-critics who wanted XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsto be a fairy tale or an epic or a romance, all the while conceding thatit was a novel, though it certainly didn’t read like one. Of course it is suigeneris, and of course it contains elements from many genres, just as it alsoinvites comparison with real-world philosophical systems. Comparisonand similarity, however, are not necessarily the same thing. Most of thesereal-world systems specify fate or free will, and even when, like Boethius,they include some version of both, they do not, as does Tolkien, assigneach to a different group existing in the same world at the same time.A good question to start with, then, is why? Why would Tolkien deliberately contrive a system so at odds with itself, so cross-grained andcontrary that nobody wants to see it, much less accept it? I suggest thathe had three reasons, one strategic, the second personal, the last sub-creative. XXXXXXXX strategic reason was to forestall or at least defuse the inevitablecomparisons with real-world systems. XXXXXXXX personal reason related to amajor and then quite recent external event in Tolkien’s life, the loss in1916 of two of his closest friends, killed in World War I. XXXXXXXX sub-creativereason was to give to an ordered universe a plausible mechanism forchange. I will tackle the strategic reason first, then the personal one, andsave the sub-creative reason for more extended discussionElements in SolutionAs to the strategy, I suggest that it was designed to assure that hismythology be taken on its own terms for the imaginative creation that itwas, without being boxed in by any mythological, philosophical or literary look-alike. In a literary culture where comparison is a standard practice and source-hunting a favorite pastime, such independence is hard tomaintain, but Tolkien did his best. While scholars such as Tom Shippeyand Marjorie Burns have offered good and clear evidence in Tolkien’swork of influences from Old and Middle English and Old Icelandic, andTolkien himself acknowledged the influence of the Finnish Kalevala onboth his Quenya language and his epic story of Túrin Turambar, in allthese cases he re-configured the borrowed material to fit his new context.Where mythology intersected religion he did no less. He specifically objected to “the Arthurian world,” as a candidate for England’s myth since itwas “involved in and explicitly contain[ed] the Christian religion,” whichseemed to him “fatal” (Letters 144). “Myth and fairy-story,” he wrote tothe publisher Milton Waldman, “must, as all art, reflect and contain insolution elements of moral and religious truth (or error), but not explicit,not in the known form of the primary ‘real’ world” (Letters 144). XXXXXXXXoperative word in this statement is art. Tolkien was writing fiction, not154Verlyn Fliegertheology. His dismissal of the Arthurian world, a probable allusion to SirThomas Malory’s allegorical Grail section of Le Morte D’Arthur (even inits toned down translation-adaptation of the French Queste del Sainte Graal)was a repudiation of its preachy didacticism.XXXXXXXX problem in a work of mythopoeic fiction is how to include “ elements of moral and religious truth (or error)” without inviting associationwith this or that familiar system of belief, an inevitable pitfall of whichTolkien was well aware. Here is an example. His statement to MiltonWaldman that, “there cannot be any ‘story’ without a fall—all stories areultimately about the fall” (Letters 147) not only implies a shared languageof belief, but goes beyond such sharing to accept the premise that a story,by virtue of having a plot, involves some kind of situational imperfection,a conflict whose resolution provides the story. Yet he was also aware thatin Western Judaeo-Christian tradition, a fall inevitably implies the Fall—the Eden story, the disobedience in the Garden, God’s punishment, andman’s expulsion from Paradise into a world of pain and suffering. For astory hoping to claim any originality, this is too much baggage to carrywithout collapsing under the weight, or inevitably turning into anotherand more familiar story. Writing as a Christian but trying not to writeabout Christianity, Tolkien avoided the pitfall by shifting his fall fromcreated humanity to the creating beings. He described it to Waldman as“a fall of Angels,” hastening to add “though quite different in form, ofcourse, to that of Christian myth” (Letters 147).Different in form it certainly is, and we may suppose deliberatelyso. First of all, it is creation by committee, not by a single Creator. AsTolkien’s creation story the “Ainulindalë” recounts, the “One,” his fictive godhead, first called Eru and then (by the Elves whose myth this is)Ilúvatar, proposes a musical theme to “the offspring of his thought” theAinur. XXXXXXXXse “offspring,” separate aspects of “the One,” make of histheme a “great music” which will be the blueprint for creation, but whichis interrupted when one of their number, the rebellious Melkor, counterswith his own theme. XXXXXXXX performance is halted by Ilúvatar and startedagain with a new theme. This, too, is interrupted with a counter-themeby Melkor and halted by Ilúvatar. On the third attempt, Melkor’s themeis taken up by Ilúvatar and woven in to his own theme so that there are“two musics progressing at one time.” One is “deep and wide and beautiful, but slow and blended with an immeasurable sorrow,” while the otheris “loud, and vain, and endlessly repeated” (S 17). Tolkien has neatly captured the beauty and poignancy, as well as the pain and suffering of theworld we live in. His fall is made to occur in the very act of creation sothat the world thus set in motion is not, as in the familiar Judaeo-Christian story of Genesis “good” until marred by human error but faulty andimperfect from the beginning. XXXXXXXX obvious parallel has been avoided but155XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earththe essential truth has been retained.Both the truth and the human experience from which it derives—thatthe world is flawed, full of surprises, and seldom works the way we want itto—are dependent on and generative of the words used to express them.XXXXXXXX names for things, as Tolkien well knew, operate to create the veryworld they describe. In the present context, such catchwords as luck, accident, chance, happenstance, coincidence, fate, destiny, all seek to name and thusto capture an aspect of human experience, the ways in which we categorize the ways things happen. XXXXXXXXy help us to relate to, if not alwaysto understand, the incomprehensible, uncontrollable forces at work inour experiences with one another and with the world around us. Wordsare important, and an author’s selection and use of words says muchabout the worldview he represents. It is therefore worthy of note thatsuch conceptually significant proper nouns as God, Heaven, Grace, Paradise,Providence, Salvation, Damnation, do not figure in Tolkien’s major fiction.Equally worthy of note are the words which do figure, and which in factplay an important role in the structuring of his world. XXXXXXXXse include, asalready noted, the noun fate as either a general concept (uncapitalized) ora proper noun/personification (capitalized), the opposing phrase free will,as well as related nouns such as doom and choice, and verbs such as choose,will, shall, and must. XXXXXXXXse had for Tolkien more specific and specialmeanings than those used (rather loosely) in the 21st century. XXXXXXXXrefore,honoring Tolkien’s position as a lover of words and the history of words,we need to look at where the words come from and what they once signified before we can understand fully what he meant them to mean.Happened, Spoken, SettledAmong the literatures which he studied and taught, the Old English epic Beowulf was surely Tolkien’s chief, though certainly not his onlylexical model, important both for its heroic and tragic ethos and for thevocabulary through which that ethos is expressed. A familiar Old Englishword, wyrd usually translated “fate,” appears in that poem nine times(Branston 65).4 It is there spelled in lower case, but can also be spelledwith a capital W and personified, as it is in other Old English poems suchas XXXXXXXX Dream of the Rood. XXXXXXXX word also appears (capitalized) as Werdysin the Middle English of Chaucer’s Legend of Good Women (Branston 67),and culminates in the Shakespearean English of Macbeth’s Weird Sisters.In the second half of line 455, Beowulf declares Gåð ä wyrd swä hïo scel,“Fate will go as it must” (l. 455), but later says, Wyrd oft nereð / unfågne eorl,þonne his ellen dëah, “fate often saves/ an undoomed man [i.e. one not appointed to die] when his courage holds” (ll. 572-73). Compare the morecurrent aphorism, “God helps those who help themselves.” If the Beowulfpoet could give fate some wiggle-room, Tolkien could (and did) do no156Verlyn Fliegerless. Just how such wiggle-room might work both in Beowulf and Tolkien’sown mythology, requires a brief dip into etymology.Bosworth-Toller’s Anglo-Saxon Dictionary glosses wyrd, related tothe Old English verb weorðan, “to happen or become.” as “What happens, fate, fortune, chance.” Linguistically related is Old Icelandic Urð,described in Snorri’s Edda as one of the three Norns or Fates, the othersnamed as Verðandi and Skuld. Urð and Verðandi are respectively the pastand present participles of the Old Icelandic verb verða. Cleasby-Vigfusson’s Icelandic-English Dictionary gives the primary meaning of verða as“To become, happen, come to pass,” with more specific meaning in senseIV as denoting necessity: “one must, needs, is forced, obliged to do.” It furtherdefines Verðandi (capitalized) as “the ‘Being’, the Weird, the name of one ofthe Norns.” Both Snorri’s Edda and the earlier Poetic Edda personify Urðas the guardian of Urð’s Well (Snorri 17; Poetic Edda 9, “Völuspá” verses19, 20); which lies beneath the root of the World Tree Yggdrasil. Suchpersonification makes it philologically reasonable to see Urð and Wyrd assimilarly-perceived forces, while Skuld, the present tense-preterite formof Old Icelandic skulu, implies “that which will have happened.” Related to modern English “shall” or “should,” it is closer in meaning to“must,” Anglo-Saxon motan, with the force of necessity, and to sense IV(see above) of Old Icelandic verða.Fate, the word most frequently used to translate both Wyrd and Urð, isdefined by XXXXXXXX American Heritage Dictionary as, “the supposed force,principle, or power that predetermines events.” It comes from Latin Fataderived from fätum, the neuter past participle of färï, to speak.” Fate,then, is what is spoken, that which has been declared to be. And finally,doom, which in modern English has negative connotations, is derivedfrom Anglo-Saxon dóm, and means simply “judgment, judicial sentence,decree.” In both “sentence” and “decree,” then, it is not unlike fate as“that spoken.” Dictionary definitions can only go so far, however, and itshould be emphasized that they are not absolutes but meanings embedded in the history of the usage of certain words, meanings themselvessubject to subtleties of usage and context. It must be emphasized as wellthat the words themselves are not things but only the words for things, thesometimes ill-fitted handles by which we try to grasp the import of whatwe cannot control and do not fully understand.No one was more aware of this than Tolkien, who declared repeatedly that his legendarium was generated to provide a home for his languages. Thus he built linguistic concepts similar to these real-world examplesinto the vocabulary of his invented languages Quenya and Sindarin. Anentry in the very early “Gnomish Lexicon” lists gwalt, †gwalod as “goodluck—any providential occurrence or thought” (Parma 11, p. 44). In the“Quenya Lexicon,” the later Quenya Amarto, Ambar(rt) is capitalized157XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth(therefore probably personified) as “Fate” (Parma 12, 34). ENGET(OR)is translated “fate, hap” (35) with engetor listed under the stem NETE as“fate, luck” (66). ENGETOR also occurs in the Valar name-list (Parma14, p. 13-14, note 12). Gnomish Bridwen is listed as “fate personified”(Parma 11, 24), with lower case pridwen with the phrase i-bridwen a-vridwenglossed as “poetic justice, judgment of fate” (64). XXXXXXXX Primitive Eldarinstem √MBAR (see Amarto above), “to make a decision” (i.e. to choose) occurs in primitive Quenya umbar, “fate,” as in Túrambar “Master of Fate,”with the verbal base √TUR, “dominate, master, conquer” as a prefix.Quenya ambar, “world,” is also derived from √MBAR, with the meaning“settlement or abode,” as in a “decision” about dwelling or occupyingland. Primitive Eldarin ambar(a), Quenya ambar, Sindarin amar, thereforecarried the sense of “settlement, appointed place,” as in the Earth/Ardaas the appointed dwelling or home of the children of Ilúvatar (Parma 17,104-105). XXXXXXXX other derivative of √MBAR, umbar meant an ordinance ordecree and thus the circumstances proceeding from such a decree, and isnot unlike the notion of fate as what is spoken. Used of the dispositionsand will of Eru,Umbar could thus correspond to History, the known or at leastthe already unfolded part, together with the Future, progressively realized. To the latter it most often referred, and isrendered Fate or Doom. But this is inaccurate, so far as genuine Elvish, especially high-elvish, is concerned, since it wasnot in that use applied only to evil events (Tolkien quoted inParma 17,105).It is not difficult to see in Umbar, “fate,” the notion of already-unfoldedHistory and “the Future, progressively realized” a concept akin to AngloSaxon Wyrd and Norse Urð as “what happens” or “has “happened” or“will have happened.” Though they are different words, the phonologicalconnection between umbar, “decree or decision,” and ambar, “appointedplace” recalls Latin Fata in their concept of Arda as the appointed (i.e.fated) home or dwelling for Elves. XXXXXXXXy are confined to the circles of theworld while it lasts, whereas Men, who “seek beyond the world and findno rest therein,” are correspondingly unconfined.Some of Tolkien’s unpublished notes on Elvish languages, manywritten after the publication of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, enlarge on suchconcepts, and, although they remain in his possession, have been madeavailable by Christopher Tolkien. XXXXXXXXse are worth particular attentionfor their specifically Elvish perspective on the actions and lives of Men (acategory which includes Hobbits). Only a portion is quoted here, for thewhole is lengthy and detailed, concluding with a move beyond the scopeof the present essentially linguistic discussion into what might better be158Verlyn Fliegercalled theology, consideration of what may be unforeseen or unintendedby characters in the drama, but is still present in the foreknowledge ofEru.[O]ne of the Eldar would have said that for all Elves andMen the shape, condition, and therefore the past and futurephysical development and destiny of this ‘earth’ was determined and beyond their power to change, indeed beyond thepower even of the Valar, to alter in any large and permanentway. ([Marginal note:] XXXXXXXXy distinguished between “change”and redirection. Thus any ‘rational [?will-user] could in asmall way move, re-direct, stop, or destroy objects in theworld; but he could not “change” into something else. XXXXXXXXydid not confuse analysis with change, e.g. water/steam, oxygen hydrogen.) XXXXXXXX Downfall of Númenor was ‘a miracle’as we might say, or as they a direct action of Eru within timethat altered the previous scheme for all remaining time. XXXXXXXXywould probably also have said that Bilbo was ‘fated’ to findthe Ring, but not necessarily to surrender it; and then if Bilbosurrendered it Frodo was fated to go on his mission, but notnecessarily to destroy the Ring—which in fact he did not do.XXXXXXXXy would have added that if the downfall of Sauron andthe destruction of the Ring was part of Fate (or Eru’s plan)then if Bilbo had retained the Ring and refused to surrenderit, some other means would have arisen by which Sauronwas frustrated. Just as when Frodo’s will proved in the endinadequate, a means for the Ring’s destruction immediatelyappeared—being kept in reserve by Eru as it were.Tolkien goes on to say that,XXXXXXXXy [i.e. Elves] would not have denied that (say) a man was(may have been) “fated” to meet an enemy of his at a certain time and place, but they would have denied that he was“fated” then to speak to him in terms of hatred, or to slayhim. “Will” at a certain grade must enter into many of thecomplex motions leading to a meeting of persons; but theEldar held that only those efforts of “will” were “free” whichwere directed to a fully aware purpose.To point out the obvious, all of this is from the Elvish point of viewand thus reflects what Tolkien intended to be a specifically Elvish understanding of the world. Important here are the subjunctive constructions: “would have said,” “would probably also have said,” “would have159XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earthadded,” “would not have denied,” all suggest a projection of Elvish perception not just on language but the worldview it expresses. Given thatthis discussion is linguistically-based, given further that the languagesand worldview concerned express perspectives generated and spoken byElves (albeit invented by Tolkien), it is noteworthy that the entire discussion looks at how Elves “would see” the actions of Men within an Elvishconcept of fate. Indeed, Tolkien was at pains on several occasions to reiterate that the mythology was Elf-generated and thus not anthropocentric. XXXXXXXX “high legends of the beginnings are supposed to look at thingsthrough Elvish minds” (Letters 145), and “the point of view of the wholecycle is the Elvish” (Letters 147).Greatness MeantNow to the personal reason. I noted in my opening paragraph thatTolkien began serious work on his mythology in late 1916. XXXXXXXX time isnoteworthy for its proximity to his war experience and thus to the warengendered deaths of two of his three closest friends. Rob Gilson, G.B.Smith, Christopher Wiseman and Tolkien had formed, when all fourwere at King Edward’s School in Birmingham, an informal fellowshipthey called the TCBS. 5 This was more than an ordinary gathering offriends; it was a brotherhood. Continued in their university years, maintained in the face of separation by war postings, the TCBS was a deeplybonded friendship of like-minded young men who shared a somewhatinchoate but deeply felt sense of artistic mission. Rob Gilson was killedon the first day of the Battle of the Somme 1 July 1916. Geoffrey BacheSmith died behind the lines on 3 December 1916 of wounds from a strayshell.By virtue of being the first, Gilson’s death had the most dramaticeffect. Tolkien’s reaction was an almost physical one. “I don’t feel a member of a little complete body now,” he wrote to Smith (Letters 10). “I wentout into the wood . . . last night and also the night before and sat andthought” (Letters 9). XXXXXXXX scene is poignant, and the letter that came out ofit shows Tolkien struggling with the third great loss in his life (his fatherwhen he was not yet four, his mother when he was twelve). Now he wasin more than grief, he was in crisis over what Rob Gilson’s death mightportend for the three surviving members of their fellowship, and for hisown sense of his place in the scheme of things.XXXXXXXX death of one man in a battle where in a single day 20,000 Allied lives were lost and nothing was won moved Tolkien to interrogateGod’s purpose not just for the dead but for the living. “I now believe,”he wrote to Smith, “that if the greatness which we three certainly meant(and meant as more than holiness or nobility alone) is really the lot of theTCBS, then the death of any of its members is but a bitter winnowing of160Verlyn Fliegerthose who were not meant to be great—at least not directly” (Letters 9).6XXXXXXXX repetition with changing connotation of the word meant—”greatnesswhich we meant,” “meant as more than holiness,” “those not meant to begreat”; the shifts from meant as “understood” to meant as “signified,” tomeant as “intended”— suggest a quest for certainty as well as for meaning. Was Gilson not “meant” to be “great” because he was killed? Was hekilled because he was not meant to be great?Unexpressed but implied is the inevitable personal corollary: wasTolkien alive because he was “meant” to be alive? “Meant” to be great?While Tolkien was still in England, Smith, already in combat in France,had urged him to publish his poems., declaring that Tolkien was “chosenlike Saul among the Children of Israel,” and if he [Smith] were to be“scuppered” [killed], there would still be “a member of the great TCBSto voice what I dreamed and what we all agreed upon” (Garth 118).Now Gilson, not Smith, had died, and Tolkien’s sense “that the TCBSwas destined to testify for God and Truth” (Letters 10) was called intoquestion. What did destined mean? What did chosen mean? 7 Were theirlives and their ambitions in their own hands to direct? Or were they, asevents now overwhelmingly suggested, controlled by forces greater thanany individual? And if that was so, how did their hopes and dreams fitinto whatever larger scheme held sway?Not long afterward, Tolkien fell sick with trench fever and was sentback to England. Here he got the news that G.B. Smith was also gone,like Gilson, killed in France; unlike Gilson, not in battle but by fragmentsfrom a stray artillery shell behind the lines. Although Smith’s woundswere not life-threatening, they turned gangrenous, and he died four daysafter he was injured, doomed because of a random explosion not aimedat him. He and Tolkien had shared a particularly strong bond of like talents and ambitions. Both were poets, both critiqued one another’s work,both had ambitions for publication. After the war, Tolkien saw to it thatSmith’s poems were posthumously published as A Spring Harvest, the titlea consciously ironic choice for the work of a young poet cut down beforehe could ripen.In the context of the hoped-for “destiny” of their fellowship, Tolkien’s own aspirations were then and afterward tangled with his feelingsof grief and loss and his struggle to see meaning in what had happened,a struggle which would find an outlet in his own writing. In the yearsleading up to the war he had been at work, albeit sporadically, on a bodyof poetry loosely focused on what he called “the Lonely Isle”—later tobecome Tol Eressea and later still Valinor—but not yet coalesced into astructured mythology. Christopher Wiseman had written to him “Youought to start the epic” (Carpenter 90). Reprieved from war by illness, henow began seriously to consider the direction of his own writing.161XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earthI do not propose that Tolkien came home from war and consciouslysat down to recreate his experience in words.8 Unlike the war writers ofhis generation such as Edmund Blunden, Wilfrid Owen, Robert Graves,and Siegfried Sassoon (all of whom did exactly that), Tolkien turned instead to mythology, then fairy tale, lastly fantasy, and filtered his experience through the gauze of his imagination. Moreover, his most powerfuldepiction of the horror of war and its effect on those who fight it—thelong ordeal of Frodo Baggins in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings—emerged onlyyears later and then in a conspicuously different frame. Filtering anddelay notwithstanding, it is surely no accident that it was in 1916-17 andin the aftermath of two specific losses that Tolkien began the story of anunending war and its never-ending consequences, a legendarium thatwould as it developed come to explore the interweaving of human desiresand impulses with a fixed and overarching design.XXXXXXXX earliest stories—“XXXXXXXX Fall of Gondolin,” an unabashed war-story written in 1916-17, “XXXXXXXX Tale of Tinuviel,” a love-story in a war setting written in 1917, “XXXXXXXX Music of the Ainur,” a creation story writtensome time between 1918 and 1920, and “Turambar and the Foalókë,”an epic tragedy centered on warfare, and in existence by 1919— all camein the four years directly following his own war experience. While theywould develop and change in the ensuing years, they did not alter theiressential nature, and formed the vital heart of his “mythology for England,” the “Silmarillion”.I am aware that biographical criticism is a perilous realm, with pitfalls for the unwary and dungeons for the overbold. XXXXXXXX presence ofbiographical elements in a work of art is easy to overemphasize, and toomuch attention to such elements has the deleterious effect of privileging the creator over the work created. Such concerns notwithstanding, itwould be naive and unrealistic to assume that the formative events of anauthor’s life play a minor part in his creative process. To acknowledge theinfluence on his writing of an author’s reading and at the same time todiscount the influence of his immediate experience seems arbitrary andunnecessarily exclusive.XXXXXXXX Music and the TaskXXXXXXXX sub-creative reason behind Tolkien’s paradox will take us to the“Silmarillion” for a look at the earliest and subsequent versions of hiscreation story, the “Ainulindalë.” This story, among the first he wrote, setsup the parameters for his Secondary World, parameters which remained,in one particular stipulation, unchanged throughout the course of manyrevisions. XXXXXXXX first version, “XXXXXXXX Music of the Ainur,” was begun according to Christopher Tolkien between November 1918 and spring 1920and set the tone for what was to follow. XXXXXXXX theme of creation proposed162Verlyn Fliegerby the godhead Ilúvatar and orchestrated by the Ainur is broken by thediscord of the rebellious Melko, who introduces an independent themeof his own. XXXXXXXX disharmony thus introduced creates the world, for afterabsorbing Melko’s theme into his own, Ilúvatar proclaims “Eä! Let thesethings be!” (S 20). XXXXXXXX world thus brought into being is “a new thing: Eä,the World that Is”(20). XXXXXXXX final verb is important. Eä is not the Worldthat Should Be, or the World that Ought to Have Been, but the world that Is.It is a portrait in music of the real world as it really appears—unfinished,conflicted, containing harmony and discord, love and hate, war andpeace. To this picture, Ilúvatar adds a surprise component—his Children, the two races of Elves and Men which come direct from him, withbut not in the third theme. XXXXXXXX earliest, “hastily-pencilled” draft says:“. . . to Men I [Ilúvatar] will appoint a task and give a greatgift.” And he devised that they should have free will and thepower of fashioning and designing beyond the original music of the Ainu, that by reason of their operations all thingsshall in shape and deed be fulfilled, and the world that comesof the music of the Ainu be completed unto the last andsmallest” (Lost Tales I 61).This singling out of Men for something extra is explicit and must bedeliberate. Men can transcend the Music. XXXXXXXXir gift is free will, and theirtask is through the exercise thereof to “complete” and “fulfill” the heretofore unfinished Music. This is fine for Men, but what about Elves?XXXXXXXXir omission from this proclamation is obvious, and its implicationsignificant. A second text, fuller, written in ink, and dated to the sameperiod, spells it out,“ . . . when the Eldar come they will be the fairest and mostlovely . . . .But to Men I will give a new gift, and a greater.”XXXXXXXXrefore he [Ilúvatar] devised that Men should have a freevirtue whereby within the limits of the powers and substances and chances of the world they might fashion and designtheir life beyond even the original Music of the Ainur that isas fate to all things else (Lost Tales I 59).XXXXXXXX conjunctions “but” and “therefore” convey consequentiality, thewords “as fate” define the Music, and the sweeping “all things else” mustby default include Elves. XXXXXXXX change of “will” to “virtue,” with the retention of “free” says the same thing more obliquely. Tolkien is here usingthe word virtue not in its usual sense of moral excellence but in the older,now obsolete sense of “particular power, efficacy,” definition # 11 in theOxford English Dictionary. Nonetheless, this free virtue is still bestowed163XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earthonly on Men. I propose that the free virtue/will of Men is Ilúvatar’swild card, and can affect fate. In thirty years of re-vision this plan neverchanged. Of the “Ainulindalë” Christopher Tolkien has written that,there is a direct tradition, manuscript to manuscript, fromthe earliest draft to the final version: each text is directlybased on the one preceding. Moreover, and most remarkably, the earliest version, written when my father was 27 or28 and embedded still in the context of the Cottage of LostPlay, was so evolved in its conception that it underwent littlechange of an essential kind. . . . the fall of the original sentences can continually be recognized in the last version ofthe Ainulindalë, written more than thirty years later, and evenmany phrases survived. (Lost Tales I 61-62)Another version, called by Christopher Tolkien Ainulindalë B and datedto “between 1930 and the end of 1937” (Lost Road 107), keeps the sameplan.In the following years Tolkien wrote a further series of revisions calledby Christopher Ainulindalë C*, C and D (Morgoth 3-4, 36-43). In all theserevisions the relevant passage remains essentially intact. Although hecautions there is “no proof ” that Tolkien was working on a revision ofthe “Ainulindalë” as early as 1946, Christopher cites “a torn half-sheet”with a passage from “Ainulindalë” among the “notes and jottings on theAdûnaic language” adjunct to the 1946 Notion Club Papers (Morgoth 4).More reliably, he says there is “certain evidence” that Ainulindalë C*“was in existence by 1948” (Morgoth 4). XXXXXXXX version in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion of1977, the one most familiar to most readers, is expanded from but in allessentials the same as the preceding versions.‘the Quendi . . . shall have and shall conceive and bring forthmore beauty than all my Children; and they shall have thegreater bliss in this world. But to the Atani I will give a newgift.’ XXXXXXXXrefore he willed that the hearts of Men should seekbeyond the world and should find no rest therein; but theyshould have a virtue to shape their life, amid the powers andchances of the world, beyond the Music of the Ainur, whichis as fate to all things else; and of their operation everythingshould be, in form and deed, completed, and the world fulfilled unto the last and smallest. (S 41-42)Elves will have beauty. XXXXXXXXy will have greater bliss “in this world.” Butthe specific and explicit “virtue” to shape their lives is reserved for Men.XXXXXXXX scope of that “virtue,” however, is left undefined. “Go beyond” does164Verlyn Fliegernot necessarily mean that Men always use free will, just that they havelicense to. Rather than prescribing free will as a constant factor, Ilúvatarsimply allows for its operation. Nor will Men always choose rightly. Whilethis is addressed most explicitly in the early “Ainulindalë,” the notion carries over in all the versions with the provision that Men, “being set amidthe turmoils of the powers of the world, would stray often, and wouldnot use their gifts in harmony” (S 42). Tolkien’s vision encompasses theobvious fact that not only are good intentions not always enough, theycan sometimes—and, in the case of a character like Túrin Turambar,often—lead to apparently bad outcomes.Nevertheless, it is important to recognize the remarkable consistencywith Tolkien has retained Ilúvatar’s declaration. Men have free will. Allthings else, including Elves, are ruled by fate. As noted above, this is hardfor readers to accept, and perhaps accounts for the fact that this aspectof the “Ainulindalë” has been under-examined by scholars of Tolkien’swork. Dan Timmons’ article on “Free Will” in Tolkien Encyclopedia notesthat “Ilúvatar . . . grants beings the ability to contribute to the “Music”according to their “will” (Encyclopedia 221), but does not identify those“beings” as Men, or note that Ilúvatar’s grant excludes “all things else.”In Tolkien and the Great War, John Garth correctly observes, “Whereas thecosmogonic Music prescribed the fate of the Elves . . . humans weregranted a ‘free virtue” to act beyond it” (Garth 275) but adds that, “Tolkien seems not to have tried to illustrate the implication that the Elves,the Valar, and Melko lack free will, which would surely have blighted hisnarrative” (275).9 Others have voiced much the same objection. Threeessays in vol. 1 of the recently-published Tolkien and Modernity (Weinreich,Fisher, and Fornet-Ponse) argue that both Elves and Men have free will.Only one (Fornet-Ponse) addresses the crucial statement by Ilúvatar, andthen only to declare that it “contradicts the whole structure of XXXXXXXX Silmarillion” (Tolkien and Modernity, 183). XXXXXXXXrefore, in this reading, Ilúvatarcould not possibly have meant what he said. This is most people’s reaction, and one of the major reasons I am writing now.However, it is one thing to parse the “Ainulindalë,” quite another toshow its consequences in action. Ilúvatar’s statement in all its versionsseems simple, declarative, unequivocal. Its playing-out in the actions andinteractions of characters within the story, however, is murky and deliberately ill-defined. It is when we leave the concept and look at its practicethat the notion becomes problematic, and Tolkien has—I think wisely—allowed it to be so. He was not designing an inter-office flow chartby which responsibility could clearly be traced from one department toanother; he was creating characters and situations through which hehoped to show how confusing the complex interaction of competing butinteractive forces can be to actors and beholders alike. It would be both165XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earthtaxing and tedious if the reader had continually to be deciding if thisor that action was the result of fate or free will. Moreover, such assignment would, if carried to its extreme, reduce the Elves to automata ina clockwork universe, moved by some external though hidden force. Itwould rob their actions, and consequently their story, of all narrativeuncertainty and all readerly suspense.Furthermore, it is important to remember that Tolkien’s charactersand situations are his inventions. XXXXXXXXy are not real people in a real world,but fictive characters in an arbitrary and invented one. In that sense theyare all fated, their actions determined by their author’s plan.10 XXXXXXXXy haveno independent existence, no lives beyond what the text gives them, noautonomy separate from Tolkien’s intent. We cannot inquire what this orthat character “would do” in a given situation, only accept what he or sheactually does in the situation created by the author. And those situationsare designed to reflect humanity’s confusing perceptions of the operations of the real world. For while the narrative voice sometimes alludesto a character’s “fate” (most clearly in the tale of Beren and Lúthien, butalso in the story of Túrin Turambar11), the characters themselves, withtwo exceptional instance to be discussed below, nowhere make it explicitthat any one of them is consciously invoking free will or fate.XXXXXXXX few statements which seem to indicate free will are spoken by thecharacters themselves (for example, Frodo’s “I will take the Ring” at theCouncil of Elrond). Likewise, statements implying an external controlling force—for example Gandalf ’s comment to Frodo that “somethingelse” was at work (though he does not say what) in Bilbo’s finding of theRing, or his further statement that Bilbo was “meant to find the Ring” inwhich case Frodo also was “meant to have it” (FR, I, ii, 65)—seem deliberately vague and obscure. XXXXXXXXy recall Tolkien’s comment, cited above,that Elves “would have said” that Bilbo was ‘fated’ to find the Ring butnot necessarily fated to surrender it. XXXXXXXXse are presumptive Elvish interpretations of events made at second hand and after the fact. Withinthe narrative, Bilbo’s finding of the Ring is made to seem accident orchance, while his surrender of it is portrayed as a reluctant act of will(Bilbo needs a little help from his friend). Tolkien was first of all trying todepict the complex, often impulsive and unpremeditated ways in whichwe respond to circumstances, ways in which separate people’s separateactions perforce impinge upon one another and upon the world aroundthem. Second, he was offering a structure within which those actionscould be both framed and accounted for—the paradox introduced at thebeginning of this discussion.In support of that paradox, and operating on the assumption thatTolkien intended Ilúvatar to mean what he said, I will move now to someillustrative examples. XXXXXXXXse, I hope, will demonstrate that Ilúvatar’s166Verlyn Fliegeroriginal statement, far from “contradicting” or “blighting” XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, instead enriches and complexifies it, and furthermore that it enrichesand complexifies its continuation which is Tolkien’s masterpiece, XXXXXXXX Lordof the Rings. I have chosen to look at the curious case of Fëanor and theSilmarils, at the conflicted triad of Beren, Lúthien and Thingol,12 and toexamine in some detail Tolkien’s handling of key moments of decisionin the representations of Aragorn, Sam Gamgee, and the dyad of Frodoand Gollum.13XXXXXXXX “Silmarillion”Fëanor Against the ValarAs an Elvish example I offer the most exceptional of the instancescited above, the perplexing passage in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion wherein, after theDarkening of Valinor, Yavanna asks Fëanor to give her the Silmarils torenew the Two Trees. His response is explicit and noteworthy. “Thisthing I will not do of free will” (S 79). If we are to believe Ilúvatar, Fëanordoes not have free will, thus its deliberate introduction here is confusing—superfluous if Fëanor has free will, and even more superfluous if hedoesn’t. Or else Tolkien is making a point. I choose to think he’s makinga point, and that he intends the phrase to operate at two different levels.One level is Fëanor’s, his response to his perceived coercion by the Valarto give up the jewels. XXXXXXXX other, larger level is Tolkien’s, for when thetidings come that Melkor has stolen the Silmarils, he, in the voice of thenarrator, adds the otherwise unnecessary comment that, “XXXXXXXX Silmarilshad passed away, and all one it may seem whether Fëanor had said yeaor nay to Yavanna; yet had he said yea at the first, before the tidings camefrom Formenos, it may be that his after deeds would have been otherthan they were. But now the Doom of the Noldor drew near” (S 79).This, as I read the situation, is exactly Tolkien’s point. Fëanor is fatedto lose the Silmarils, and the Silmarils are fated to pass out of his keeping.He could not give them to Yavanna if he chose, for they are no longer his.But the editorial addendum implies that his answer to Yavanna, regardless of whether he could act on it, would affect his subsequent actions.While Christopher Tolkien includes this comment in “XXXXXXXX Later QuentaSilmarillion” as published in Morgoth (295), the passage does not appear inthe earlier “Quenta Silmarillion” as given in XXXXXXXX Lost Road. Here Fëanor,“distraught with grief for the slaying of his father, and anguish for therape of the Silmarils,” vows to pursue Morgoth (Lost Road. 234). XXXXXXXXOath of Fëanor and the flight of the Noldor are essentially as in XXXXXXXXSilmarillion.Three verb forms are critical in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion’s version: the subjunctive “had he said” and the conditional “it may be” and “would have167XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earthbeen.” All three convey a sense of contingency, the possibility that thingsmight have turned out differently. But could they? Could Fëanor havesaid otherwise than he said, done otherwise than he did? How much isin the Music? It seems wyrd in all senses of the word. Tolkien has againmuddied the waters by suggesting that if Fëanor’s response had been different, that difference might have affected his subsequent deeds. But now(my emphasis) his choice brings on the Doom of the Nolder. Free will canapparently invite fate. As noted earlier, doom is derived from Anglo-Saxon dòm. While its primary meaning is: “I. judgment, decree, ordinance,law,” it has also a rare usage listed as IV. “Will, free will, choice, option”(Bosworth-Toller). Thus Fëanor’s impracticable choice to deny Yavannathe Silmarils, and his consequent oath to pursue Morgoth bring on thechoice of the Noldor to follow him, which leads to their Doom. Thoughthat doom is spoken in the voice of Mandos, it is the Noldor who in effectdoom themselves.If, as Ilúvatar decrees and as I argue, Fëanor is bound by the Music,his “after deeds” must be in that Music, therefore not subject to change.How then, could those deeds have been “other” than they were? XXXXXXXXparallel passage from the Later, post-Lord of the Rings version of the QuentaSilmarillion written in 1951-52 (Morgoth 141) reads, “had he said yea at thefirst, and so cleansed his heart ere the dreadful tidings came, his after deedswould have been other than they proved” [my emphasis] (Morgoth 295). Here thepotential for change in Fëanor is explicit; to have said “yea” would have“cleansed” his heart, which because of his intransigent “nay” remainedfilled with anger and resentment. XXXXXXXX unequivocal comment that hisdeeds “would have been other” is far stronger than the conditional “itmay be.” But the question remains: how might his deeds have “beenother” if they were in the Music? XXXXXXXX problem seems deliberately unsolvable, but Tolkien’s word other may offer a solution. Traditionally anadjective modifying a noun, other is here employed in its rarer adverbialusage of “otherwise, differently, in another way” as modifying a verb,in this case the implied verb done, as in “after deeds have been [done]”otherwise.Tolkien may be saying that while the deeds themselves would inevitably be done, Fëanor’s “yea”—if he had said it—could have changedhis motive and perhaps his way of doing them. In that case, their qualitymight have turned out to be “other” than they “proved.” XXXXXXXX distinction,like that between killing for revenge and killing in self-defense, is in themotive behind the act. In the case of Fëanor the distinction is betweengetting back the Silmarils to be “lords of the unsullied light” (S 83), andrecovering them to re-illumine Valinor. That in the end he cannot doeither does not invalidate or alter Tolkien’s point. I offer this as the bestrationale I can think of for that otherwise inexplicable and unnecessary168Verlyn Fliegercoda in two separate versions. It seems clear that Tolkien felt the additionserved a purpose. Fate—the Music—cannot be changed by an Elf. Thus,the Silmarils are gone, their fate already decided and out of Fëanor’scontrol. But his interior psychology could be changed, and that changecould affect the nature of his subsequent actions.Aragorn at the FallsMy Mannish example is Aragorn, who at the Falls of Rauros isforced to make a choice with too little information to go on. Realizingthat Frodo is gone and Merry and Pippin have been captured, Aragornmust choose what to do next. His options are: to follow Frodo, to keep hispromise to Boromir to go to Minas Tirith, to rescue Merry and Pippin.XXXXXXXXre is no easy or obvious choice, and his emotionally charged dialoguewith himself signals his confusion and ambivalence. Hearing Boromir’shorn as he comes down from the high seat he laments his absence fromthis crisis. “Alas! An ill fate is on me this day and all that I do goes amiss”(TT, III, i, 15). Faced subsequently with Boromir’s dying injunction togo to Minas Tirith, Aragorn asks without expectation of answer “Whatshall I do now?” (16).Shall is here more than a simple future tense; it has, especially in thepersonified form of Old Norse Skuld, the force of skulu with its connotation of something already decided. Aragorn is questioning fate, andagain comments, “All that I have done today has gone amiss”(17). Tornbetween following the Ringbearer or going after Merry and Pippin, hedeclares, “An evil choice is now before us” (17), and finally, deciding tofollow the young hobbits, says, “now may I make a right choice andchange the evil fate of this unhappy day” (21). Unhappy,” here, does notmean “sad,” but “unfortunate, unlucky,” the older, medieval usage asgiven in definition 4 under unhappy in the OED, “Of conditions: markedby misfortune or mishap.” Aragorn’s words constitute the closest the narrative comes to making explicit the interaction between the two forces,and is the only direct reference I can think of in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings tothe power of Men to go beyond the Music. It is significant for its clearimplication that Aragorn is aware this power. A more oblique referencecomes only a few pages later, when in answer to Éomer’s question “Whatdoom do you bring out of the North?” Aragorn replies, “XXXXXXXX doom ofChoice” (TT, III, ii, 36).Thingol, Beren, LúthienLet us move now to the more complex interactions of Elves withMen. When free-willed Man meets fated Elf, who does what to whom?Tolkien has left the answers deliberately opaque. XXXXXXXX story of Beren,Lúthien and Thingol is the most tangled, for here Tolkien has inverted169XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earththe language, using “fate” and “doom” for Beren and “free” for Lúthien,which makes it difficult to figure out who is doing what to whom. I argue that this is deliberate, intended to reflect the confused and confusingperceptions that characterize Tolkien’s internal story-tellers, in this casethose of his fictive bard, Daeron the minstrel. (It is also worth notingthat Beren was originally an Elf and was later changed to a Man.) Berencomes to Doriath because it is “put into his heart that he would go downinto the Hidden Kingdom.” He passes through the mazes Melian haswoven as she foretold, for “a great doom lay upon him.” As Lúthien lookson Beren “doom fell upon her, and she loved him” (S 164-65). Of Beren’smeeting with Lúthien Tolkien writes that, “he [Beren] began the payment of anguish for the fate that was laid on him; and in his fate Lúthienwas caught, and being immortal she shared his mortality; and being freereceived his chain” (S 165-66).This is piling contradiction on paradox. Lúthien is described as “being free.” But free from what? Beren has a fate that “was laid on him.”By whom? Are we to understand that Beren is fated and Lúthien hasfree will? Beren tells Thingol that his “fate” led him to Doriath, wherehe found what he “sought not,” that is, Lúthien. Melian’s statement that,“not by you [i.e. Thingol] shall Beren be slain; and far and free does hisfate lead him, yet it is wound with yours” (167) muddies the water evenfurther, yet the word “free” in this context, juxtaposed against “fate,” suggests that Beren’s fate is to make a free choice. If that is the case, however,freedom to choose doesn’t always work. When he cuts the Silmaril fromMorgoth’s crown “it came into Beren’s mind” (cp. “it was put into hisheart” above) that he would go beyond his vow and take all three. “But,”the narrative, is at pains to point out, “such was not the doom of theSilmarils.” XXXXXXXX knife snaps, Morgoth stirs, and Beren and Lúthien fleewith one Silmaril.Let us suppose, since that is “what happens,” (i.e. wyrd) that Thingol’sfate in the Music is to die by violence.14 That fate is directed by the free action of Beren, a Man whose appearance in Doriath and love for Lúthienarouse Thingol’s anger and spark his request for a Silmaril, which leadsto his obsession with the jewel which in turn leads to his death. Thatthis death does not come about as a direct result of Lúthien’s marriageto Beren but takes place years later and under other circumstances, isevidence of Tolkien’s method of “winding” Thingol’s fate with Beren’sfree will. Beren’s free acceptance of Thingol’s demand brings Thingola Silmaril and wins Beren Lúthien, while Thingol’s fated possession ofthe jewel becomes his doom as his greed conjoins the Silmaril and theDwarf-necklace, leads to his quarrel with the Dwarves, and results in hisdeath at their hands. XXXXXXXX point seems to be simply that the choices ofMen can trigger the fates of Elves and the fates of Elves can tilt the lives170Verlyn Fliegerof Men, while both can affect the world they both inhabit.Turning now from Elves and (Big) Men to Hobbits, my examples willshow Tolkien working even more precisely at the lexical level, and willillustrate his careful and exact use of language, especially three verbs—will, shall, and must, whose history I have already discussed—as well aschoice, choose, and fate.Samwise at the High PassMy first Hobbit example is Sam Gamgee. It is not by accident thatan important chapter in the plot’s development is titled “XXXXXXXX Choices ofMaster Samwise.” Finding Frodo’s dead (as he thinks) body, Sam goesthrough an agony of indecision over how to respond. His first despairingquestion to himself is “What shall I do, what shall I do” (TT, II, x, 340).His options are to go home, to stay with Frodo, to kill Gollum, to killhimself, or to take the Ring and go on. He has no information that willhelp him to make a right decision. Having considered and rejected thefirst four options, Sam then considers “the hard answer,” which is to takeFrodo’s burden and go on to the Cracks of Doom. XXXXXXXX key words willand must follow one another now in rapid succession as Sam tells himself“I must make up my own mind. I will make it up” (341).Knowing the precision with which Tolkien uses words, and the weightof internal historical evidence that lies behind them, we can see thatSam is not merely lecturing himself; he is unknowingly invoking bothhis destiny and his free will. He must make up his own mind. He mustthink for himself. He must choose to do. Nonetheless, Tolkien shows himstill indecisive. “I’ve made up my mind,” he says to himself, but the narrative adds, that “he had not,” moreover, that “what he was doing wasaltogether against the grain of his nature.” This leads Sam to self-doubt.“Have I got it wrong?” he asks, and then, as if there were someone present to tell him: “what ought I to have done?” (342). Sam’s dilemma is thatof someone facing a job he does not want but knows he has to do.That having decided, he then changes his mind and starts back toFrodo, is not so much evidence of Sam’s vacillation as of Tolkien’s intent to underscore the perennial human problem of how to act in lightof too little information. XXXXXXXX missing information, that Frodo is alive,leads Sam to his last and most practical question. “Now what is to bedone?” (350) XXXXXXXX difference between his earlier, despairing, semi-rhetorical “what ought I to have done?” and the pragmatic, down-to-business,“what is to be done?” is more than grammatical. XXXXXXXX later phrase impliesacknowledgment that there is a task appointed, while the former indicates helplessness, indecision, and despair.171XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earthFrodo and Gollum in the Looking-GlassMy last example is the dyad of Gollum and Frodo, who within themselves and with each other best embody Tolkien’s fate-free will conjunction. When the Council of Elrond learns that Gollum has escaped theWood-elves and is again on the loose, Gandalf reacts dismissively. “Well,well. He is gone. We have no time to seek for him again.” And then headds what seems an unnecessary tag: “He must do what he will” (FR,II, ii, 269). This says it all. Tolkien has placed Gollum at a nexus of fateand free will in which each acts on the other and both act on Gollum.His wish (willan) for the Ring becomes necessity (motan), controlling hissubsequent actions, especially his last and most desperate action at theCracks of Doom. He is fated to follow his own desire. Gandalf ’s statement foreshadows Frodo’s similar but opposite declaration on AmonHen. Released from the Eye of Sauron on Amon Hen, and in the liberation of being “free to choose” to take off the Ring, Frodo declares, “Iwill do now what I must” (FR, II, x, 417). In both their similarity and difference the two statements mirror one another, and both derive directlyfrom Ilúvatar’s pronouncement concerning fate and free will at the closeof the “Ainulindalë”.Tolkien clearly shows Frodo, Gollum’s opposite and alter ego, voluntarily (willan) committing himself to the fate (motan) appointed for him.His free will accepts his fate. Other examples are easily passed over inthe flow of the narrative, but stand out clearly when words like fate, choice,must, and will are highlighted. At the Falls of Rauros, when the Companymust decide which way to go from there, Aragorn tells Frodo that even ifGandalf were there to advise them, “the choice would still wait on you.Such is your fate” (FR, II, x, 412). Finding the Black Gate of Mordorclosed, Frodo accepts Gollum’s suggestion that they take the secret pathof Cirith Ungol. “I must trust you once more,” he tells Gollum. “Indeedit seems that I must do so, and that it is my fate to receive help from you,where I least looked for it, and your fate to help me whom you long pursued with evil purpose” (TT, IV, iii, 248). Responding to Sam’s suspicionsboth of him and the secret path, Gollum states that “If master says I mustgo or I will go, then he must try some way” (TT, IV, iii, 251)That he and Gollum both freely participate in the Ring’s destiny toarrive at the Cracks of Doom shows their free will collaborating with itsfate. Doom and choice, must and will are interlocking systems, cogs turned“by small hands” which move the wheels of the world while “the eyesof the great are elsewhere “ (FR, II, ii, 283). XXXXXXXX final confrontationat the Cracks of Doom brings the conflict down to a contest of “smallhands”—Frodo’s hand now wearing the Ring and Gollum’s hands asthey “draw upward to his mouth” and then “[hold] aloft the Ring” as he172Verlyn Fliegerfalls into the fire (RK, VI, iii, 224). But the wheels of the world are turnedas much by words as by hands large or small, and it is in his words thatwe must look for clues to Tolkien’s design. XXXXXXXX key lies in Frodo’s “I will”at Rivendell, where he reluctantly volunteers for a job he does not want,and does not think he can do. “I will take the Ring,” he announces, andthe narrative adds the significant comment, “as if some other will was using his small voice” (FR, II, ii, 284). Given what we know about the background mythology and the intent of Ilúvatar for Men it seems reasonableto interpret this “other will” as Ilúvatar’s. But Ilúvatar’s will was to giveMen free will. His will in this instance, therefore, must be that Frodo, likeBeren, make a free choice. To complicate the matter, Frodo’s “I will” ismodified by Elrond’s “this task is appointed for you, Frodo,” echoingin what is surely no accident Ilúvatar’s, “to Men I will appoint a task.”Elrond’s comment that, “if you take it freely, I will say that your choiceis right” (284), suggests that the rightness lies not just in acceptance ofthe task of carrying the Ring but also (though Frodo is unaware of it) inacceptance of the “task” of Men that is to transcend the Music.XXXXXXXX Ring, however, like the Silmarils and “all things else,” is boundby the Music, making it difficult to interpret this situation except as theinterjection of free will into the operation of fate. Frodo’s journey, andits yet-to-be-decided outcome, will affect the fate of all Middle-earth.Nowhere will this appear more completely than in the fate of Elves. Galadriel states it plainly to Frodo,Do you not see now wherefore your coming is to us as thefootsteps of Doom? For if you fail, then we are laid bare tothe Enemy. Yet if you succeed, then our power is diminished,and Lothlórien will fade and the tides of Time will sweep itaway. (FR, II, vii, 380)At the other end of Frodo’s journey, as he claims the Ring at theCracks of Doom, he again makes a declarative statement, now reversinghis words at Amon Hen. “I do not choose now to do what I came to do.I will not do this deed” (RK, VI, iii, 223). It seems a backhanded exerciseof free will—to choose not to do. Nevertheless, the fact that in the manuscript this sentence is written above the line, replacing an earlier “I cannot do what I have come to do” (Marquette Archive Series 3, Box 8, Roll11, p. 39), makes it clear that Tolkien intended that Frodo, as ChristopherTolkien points out, “fully willed his act” (Sauron 38). And although Christopher also comments that he “does not think that the difference is verysignificant,” it is notable that Frodo’s “I will not do this deed” harks backnot just to his statement on Amon Hen but also to his earlier declarationat the Council of Elrond. It is at Mount Doom, in a climactic intersection of will and must, that the task appointed for Frodo, who now will not173XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earth“do what he must,” is inadvertently accomplished by Gollum, who mustfollow his will, wrest the Ring from Frodo and carry it where it is fated togo—into the fire. Frodo’s and Gollum’s inadvertent yet combined actionsat the Cracks of Doom, actions of will both inevitable and spontaneous,between them operate to save Middle-earth.XXXXXXXX Point of the ParadoxThis leads back to my opening why, and Tolkien’s sub-creative rationale for his green sun paradox, which was to provide a plausible mechanism for change in an ordered universe. XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings’s dramaticresolution in the destruction of the Ring by the conflicting and freelywilled actions of Frodo and Gollum points thematically toward the telos,the final end of Tolkien’s paradox. Tolkien described this telos as, “a vision of the end of the world, its breaking and remaking, and the recoveryof the Silmarilli and the ‘light before the Sun’—after a final battle whichowes, I suppose, more to the Norse vision of Ragnarök than to anythingelse, though it is not much like it” (Letters 149). Although at the storylevel he never reached this point, the concept makes clear that he envisioned an apotheosis in which the discord of the original Music wouldbe harmonized in the Second Music, which explicitly includes Men inits performance. This is made clear in his letter to Waldman, where hestates explicitly that “[t]he making, and nature, of the Children of God”,the “two chief secrets” of “the Creator” withheld from the Valar, areintended “partly to redress the evil of the rebel Melkor, partly for thecompletion of all” (Letters 147). All the evidence points to his clear intention for Men to join in the Second Music, in which the themes will beplayed aright because the task of Men has been to enable that playing.XXXXXXXX Silmarillion states, “of old the Valar declared to the Elves in Valinorthat Men shall join in the Second Music of the Ainur; whereas Ilúvatarhas not revealed what he purposes for the Elves after the world’s end, andMelkor has not discovered it” (S 42). That this was Tolkien’s plan fromthe beginning is clear from a similar passage in the second 1919-20 draftin XXXXXXXX Book of Lost Tales I which states that, “Never was there before, norhas there been since, such a music . . . though it is said that a mightier farshall be woven before the seat of Ilúvatar by the choirs of both the Ainurand the sons of Men after the Great End. XXXXXXXXn shall Ilúvatar’s mightiestthemes be played aright; for then Ainur and Men will know his mind andheart as well as may be, and all his intent” (Lost Tales I 53). It seems clearthat in this “mightier far” music the “mightiest themes” will be playedaright because the actions and choices of Men will have enabled theirplaying. XXXXXXXX role of Elves in this finale is deliberately left obscure, for“while the Sons of Men will after the passing of things of a certainty joinin the Second Music of the Ainur, what Ilúvatar has devised for the Eldar174Verlyn Fliegerbeyond the world’s end he has not revealed” (Lost Tales I 59-60).I mentioned earlier that the words God, Heaven, Grace, Paradise, Providence, Salvation, Damnation, make no appearance in the mythology. Nordoes the word Redemption. Like the others, it is a name for a concept forwhich Tolkien chose his own term, free will. By free actions over manyyears, his free-willed Men will have changed the Music and the worldfrom what it is to what it has the potential to be. XXXXXXXXy will have fulfilledand completed the world and brought it to its intended but unforeseenapotheosis. Acting individually, sometimes acting wrongly, and acting always in ignorance of the ultimate outcome of their choices, they willover the course of time have the totality of their actions exert a selfcorrecting function that will lead them—and the Elves whose lives theyintersect—to the right purpose and fulfillment of the Music of creation.While the inevitable comparison is with Saint Augustine’s notion of theFortunate Fall that expels humankind from Paradise but brings it thehope of heaven, the differences between Tolkien’s imaginative vision andAugustine’s Judaeo-Christian one are important. In Tolkien’s work theFall is Melkor’s, not Adam’s. Tolkien’s sub-created cosmos has no Paradise from which humanity is driven out, only a world flawed in the making into which they are introduced in order to change it. Elves and Menwill carry the responsibility for illustrating, both in their interactions withone another and across the gap that divides them, just how living in animperfect world might serve a larger plan.XXXXXXXX post-Lord of the Rings Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth, according toChristopher Tolkien written some time in 1959 (Morgoth 304) supportsthis view. In a dialogue about death, the human woman Andreth remarks, “among us some hold that our errand here was to heal the Marring of Arda” and “‘Arda Healed’ (or Remade) shall not be ‘Arda Unmarred’, but a third thing and a greater” (Morgoth 351). Ilúvatar’s originaltheme corrupted by Melkor into the Music would be replaced the Second Music when the themes of Ilúvatar would be played “aright.” Alate linguistic commentary by Tolkien published in Parma EldalamberonXVII, Words, Phrases & Passages in “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,” gives additionalcorroboration. His discussion of “XXXXXXXX Knowledge of the Valar, or Elvishideas and theories concerned with them” contains the following highlyrelevant comments:XXXXXXXXre was, however, one element in the design of Eru [Ilú-vatar] that remained a mystery: the Children of Eru, Elvesand Men, the Incarnate. XXXXXXXXse were said to have been an addition made by Eru himself after the Revelation to the primalspirits of the Great Design.”XXXXXXXX same passage notes further that,175XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earthAnother purpose they [Elves and Men] had, which remaineda mystery to the Valar, was to complete the Design by ‘healing’ the hurts which it suffered, and so ultimately not to recover ‘Arda Unmarred’ (that is the world as it would havebeen if Evil had never appeared) but the far greater thing‘Arda Healed’. (Parma 17 177-78)Together, these passages from the “Athrabeth” and Parma make it clearthat the “addition” of the Children and their purpose to “complete theDesign” were Eru-Ilúvatar’s extended, drawn-out work in progress intended to correct the harm done to the world by Melkor. XXXXXXXXy supportthe initial and unchanged statement in “Ainulindalë” already discussed,and help to clarify the “task” appointed to Men by Ilúvatar in the aftermath of Creation. I suggest that the purpose of the Children—thatis, both Elves and Men—to complete the design must be twofold in itsaction, for otherwise there would be no necessity for two separate races.Unless the interaction of the two was formative, the power given to Mento “shape their lives” would affect them alone without any wider consequences for the world. Nor would there be wider consequences unlessthere was some pre-existing circumstance on which that power couldwork, the pre-determination of events that is the Music. XXXXXXXX energy inthe contact of Men with Elves is the engine for change. XXXXXXXX free will ofMen acting on and against the fate of Elves will bring about the desiredre-vision of the Music. It is worth noting that nothing is said in thesepassages about free will or free virtue, but a further comment in the samesection that “the minds of the Children were not open to the Valar (except by the free will of the Children” (Parma 17, 178) must be considered.“Children” is clearly here an inclusive noun encompassing both Elvesand Men, and I take the operation of free will in this instance to bealong the lines of Fëanor’s in saying yea or nay to Yavanna— an internalprocess not affecting events but deeply influencing the inner nature ofindividuals involved in those events.Finally, and this will loop back to my opening discussion:, severalpoints should be re-iterated.(1) Tolkien was writing fiction, not theology. He was not arguingfor the validity of either fate or free will.(2) XXXXXXXX entire concept should be seen as an imaginary sub-creation in which the contending forces of fate and free will conjoin to form a “green sun,” an element or aspect deliberatelycontrary to the Primary world but essential and formative inthe Secondary one(3) XXXXXXXX mythology in its entirety is meant to be read in the context176Verlyn Fliegerof Tolkien’s narrative strategy of using a multiplicity of storytellers and points of view rather than a single omniscient narrative voice. Among these fictive storytellers are the Elvish sageRúmil, the mortal voyager Eriol/Ælfwine, the Elvish minstrelDaeron, the mortal woman Andreth, and the mortal hobbitsBilbo and Frodo Baggins and Sam Gamgee, all of whom areallowed to tell it as they see it. No one, it seems, was intendedto have the final word. Except Ilúvatar, who tells Melkor, “notheme may be played that hath not its uttermost source in me,nor can any alter the music in my despite” (S 17), and leaves itat that.By establishing and following his own rules Tolkien has succeeded in giving his invented world the “inner consistency of reality” he insisted wasessential. XXXXXXXX intersection of fate and free will replicates the real world,where these concepts are also inextricably intertwined and interdependent. Fate assumes the absence (therefore the conceptual presence) ofchoice, while the freedom of free will must rely on its opposite as thatfrom which to be free. As there is no concept of up without its oppositedown, or of inside without an outside, so with fate and free will eachdepends on the other for its meaning. It is well to remember, moreover,that fate and free will, for all humanity’s engagement with them as ideas,are neither facts nor principles. XXXXXXXXy are not easily demonstrable, likegravity, nor clinically testable, like a controlled experiment. Rather, theyare human interpretations imposed upon phenomena that may or maynot have them in actuality.Excluding the exceptional circumstances of prophecy or second sight,a pattern seen as fate is nearly always recognized in retrospect, organizedwith hindsight out of a selection of salient circumstances that appear torelate most directly to one another and thus to make a coherent design.Free will is fate’s opposite but also its corollary and partner, dependenton the appearance of choice in major areas of life. Few would bother toinvoke free will in the performance of the small tasks of daily life, bathing and dressing, eating and drinking. XXXXXXXX concept of free will comesinto play when the importance of choice is significant, when humanity’s“virtue” to influence events for good or ill is seen as an essential part ofhuman activity in the world.What emerges in Tolkien’s depiction of Eä, the “World that Is,” isa picture of the confusing state of affairs in the world that really “is,” astate of affairs as it appears to us humans, an uncertain, unreliable, untidy, constantly swinging balance between fate and human effort, betweenthe Music and the Task. Unlike philosophers past and present, Tolkienwas not attempting to solve the puzzle, nor was he intending to show that177XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earthone or the other principle governed the world and those within it. Hewas trying to show the world the way he saw it—as a place of hope anddespair, cruelty and compassion. He saw it as a place where accidentshappen, where plans go awry, where young men die in war and childrenlose their parents, where the right side can lose, where love is not alwaysenough. But he also saw it as a place where human beings of good willand good intentions grope often blindly toward a more hopeful futurethat remains out of sight but not out of mind. His invented world deliberately included provisions for both fate and free will in order to reflectthe often inevitable, sometimes unexpected, frequently incomprehensibleunfolding of events as they happen in and shape humanity’s perceptionsof the real world. XXXXXXXX whole elaborate enterprise was, as described in thequote from John Garth which forms my epigraph, “nothing less than anattempt to justify God’s creation of an imperfect world filled with suffering, loss, and grief ” (Garth 255).XXXXXXXX struggles undergone by the characters who inhabit Tolkien’s fictive world require both order and spontaneity to justify them, to givethem meaning, and above all to create that uncertainty of outcome whichis a hallmark of effective fiction. XXXXXXXX story needs its readers’ awarenessof both the Music and the task. Thus, we as readers must recognize thatthe original great theme, proposed by Ilúvatar and spoiled in the making by Melkor, is embedded first in the ensuing Music and then in theworld created through that Music. We must see that this spoiled Musicgoes uncorrected by the godhead, who instead assigns that task to onerace of his created beings. We must honor the decision (not really Eru’sbut Tolkien’s) to introduce into this unhappy, unfinished world the twounanticipated races of Elves and Men; and the further decision to giveone race, Men, the freedom to change their lives and through those livesto change the Music and thus the fate of Middle-earth and its inhabitants. Only then can we understand the paradox with which I introducedthis discussion as Tolkien’s ultimately hopeful vision for what he saw as afallen world: that in a flawed and faulty Creation it is the task appointedfor flawed and faulty human beings—struggling with the world aroundthem, sometimes making false starts, often following twisting paths ofwhich they themselves cannot always see the ends—to lead themselvesand that world out of error and into light.Notes1 This is not to say that all readers have overlooked it. See the verythorough entry for “Free Will and Fate” in Scull and Hammond’sReader’s Guide, vol. 2 of XXXXXXXX J.R.R. Tolkien Companion and Guide (324-333). See also my own exploration in Splintered Light: Logos and Languagein Tolkien’s World (52-53).178Verlyn Flieger1 It should be emphasized that the ensuing discussion is entirely literary, not theological or philosophical. I am not (nor was Tolkien),arguing the actuality or the validity of either fate or free will, merelytheir fictive representation as aspects of his invented world. Conceptually, of course, and semantically, each apparently independent element requires the other as its opposite corollary, as up needs down, ordark needs light for full comprehension. Free implies that from whichto be free, a constraint removed or denied; while Fate, cf. the OED’sfirst definition as the unalterable predetermination of events, impliesrestraint of what would otherwise be free.2 My knowledge of modern fantasy, I hasten to add, is not encyclopedic. I welcome correction by those more familiar with the subject.3 Such readings include Boethian, as both Shaun Hughes and Kathleen Dubs proclaim (Hughes review of Tolkien and Modernity in TolkienStudies V (25); Dubs “Providence, Fate, and Chance: Boethian Philosophy in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings” in Tolkien and the Invention of Myth);Boethian and/or Manichean, both of which are considered but rejected by Tom Shippey in his Road to Middle-earth (128-9); Augustinianas John Houghton maintains in his article “Augustine of Hippo” inJ.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia.4 Wyrd is one of several words used in the poem to denote an all-powerful supernatural force, others being Metod, “measure,” Dryhten, “lordor XXXXXXXX Lord” (often translated as “God”) and God with specific reference to the Judaeo-Christian deity. XXXXXXXX intended meanings and appropriate translations have been and still are the focus of the ongoingdebate over the amount of Christianity in the poem. My purposehere is not to enter that debate, merely to note the worldview conveyed by wyrd in its original meaning.5 XXXXXXXX initials stood for “Tea Club Barrovian Society,” after BarrowsStore in downtown Birmingham, the meeting place of the four whenthey were students together at King Edward’s School.6 XXXXXXXX phrase “what we three certainly meant” was an allusion to the“Council of London,” a meeting among Tolkien, Smith, Gilson andWiseman in December of 1914 that in some fashion crystallized thehopes and artistic ambitions of the four before they went off to war.7 Although more than two decades separate Smith’s words from Frodo’s, that hobbit’s outcry to Gandalf at Bag End, “Why was I chosen?” seems in context a direct response.8 Though it should be noted that several critics have seen a connection179XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earthbetween Tolkien’s war experience and his fiction, among them BrianRosebury, who links Tolkien to the “lost generation” of World WarI writers, (Rosebury 133-52), and Tom Shippey, who characterizeshim as a “post-war writer” in the tradition of George Orwell, William Golding, and T.H. White (Road 288). John Garth’s Tolkien and theGreat War sheds new biographical light on the connection, and JanetBrennan Croft’s War and the Works of J.R.R. Tolkien gives valuable insights into Tolkien’s treatment of war in XXXXXXXX Hobbit and XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings.9 Careful reading of “Ainulindalë” shows that the Valar, who are outside—indeed are creators of—the Music, are for that reason independent of it. Indeed, Ilúvatar makes clear their autonomy when heinvites them to adorn the Music “each with his own thoughts anddevices, if he will” [my emphasis].10 A note in Tolkien’s unpublished linguistic papers is apposite here.He wrote that, “[t]he author is not in the tale in one sense, yet it allproceeds from him (and what was in him), so that he is present allthe time. Now while composing the tale he may have certain generaldesigns (the plot for instance), and he may have a clear conceptionof the character (independent of the particular tale) of each feignedactor. But those are the limits of his ‘foreknowledge’. Many authorshave recorded the feeling that one of their actors ‘comes alive’ as itwere, and does things that were not foreseen at all at the outset andmay modify in a small or even large way the process of the tale thereafter. All such unforeseen actions or events are, however, taken up tobecome integral parts of the tale when finally concluded. Now whenthat has been done, then the author’s ‘foreknowledge’ is complete,and nothing can happen, be said, or done, that he does not know ofand will/or allow to be. Even so, some of the Eldarin philosophersventured to say, it was with Eru.”11 Turambar and the Foalókë,” XXXXXXXX Book of Lost Tales earliest version ofXXXXXXXX Children of Hurin, Tolkien applies the word weird explicitly toTúrin: “. . . soon too had he met his death—and his weird had beenthe happier thereby” (Lost Tales II, 85).12 It is worth noting in this context that what Tolkien called the “threeGreat Tales” of his legendarium, the story of Beren and Lúthien,XXXXXXXX Fall of Gondolin, and XXXXXXXX Children of Húrin all involve the intrusion of a free-willed Man into a fated Elvish stronghold with directeffect on the lives of the elves therein, as well as on the outcome ofthe story.180Verlyn Flieger13 Considerations of space preclude examination of the greatest exemplar of the intricate interconnections of fate and free will, Túrin sonof Húrin, whose chosen epithet, Turambar embodies the Quenyamorpheme mbar (fate), and whose free choices bring disaster on himself and those around him, both Men and Elves.14 XXXXXXXX fairy tale model for the whole episode is the story of “Culhwchand Olwen” in the Welsh Mabinogion. XXXXXXXX story is an exemplar of thetale-type called by folklorists XXXXXXXX Giant’s Daughter. Its plot hingeson the efforts of a supernatural parent whose death, it is foretold (i.e.fated), will occur when his daughter marries, to forestall the marriageby setting the suitor an impossible and deliberately lethal task. Whenthe suitor, with the aid of magic, accomplishes the task, the parent isaccordingly killed. Variants on this type can be found in the FinnishKalevala’s wooing stories of two of that mythology’s heroes, Ilmarinenand Lemminkainen. Ilmarinen succeeds. Lemminkainen does not.WORKS CITEDBeowulf: A Dual-Language Edition, trans. Howell Chickering. New York:Doubleday, 1977.Branston, Brian. XXXXXXXX Lost Gods of England, New York: Oxford UniversityPress, 1974.Dubs, Kathleen. “Fortune and Fate.” In J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia, ed.Michael D.C. Drout. New York: Routledge, 2007.–––. “Providence, Fate, and Chance: Boethian Philosophy in XXXXXXXX Lord ofthe Rings.” In Tolkien and the Invention of Myth, ed. Jane Chance.Lexington, KY: XXXXXXXX University Press of Kentucky, 2004.Fisher, Jason. “‘Man does as he is when he may do as he wishes’: XXXXXXXX Perennial Modernity of Free Will.” In Tolkien and Modernity vol. 1,ed. Frank Weinreich and Thomas Honegger. Zollikofen: Walking Tree Publishers, 2006.Flieger, Verlyn. Splintered Light: Logos and Language in Tolkien’s World, RevisedEdition. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press, 2002.Fornet-Ponse, Thomas. “Freedom and Providence as Anti-Modern Elements.” In Tolkien and Modernity, vol. 1, ed. Frank Weinreich andThomas Honegger. Zollikofen: Walking Tree Publishers, 2006.Garth, John. Tolkien and the Great War. London: HarperCollins, 2003.Houghton, John. “Augustine of Hippo,” In J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia, ed.181XXXXXXXX Music and the Task: Fate and Free Will in Middle-earthMichael D.C. Drout. New York: Routledge, 2007.Hughes, Shaun. Review of Tolkien and Modernity in Tolkien Studies, vol. IV.Morgantown: West Virginia University Press, 2008.XXXXXXXX Poetic Edda, trans. Bellows. New York: Biblo and Tannen, 1969.Rosebury, Brian. Tolkien: A Critical Assessment. New York: St. Martin’sPress, 1992.Scull, Christina and Wayne Hammond. XXXXXXXX J.R.R. Tolkien Companionand Guide, vol. I Chronology. London: HarperCollins Publishers,2007.Shippey, Tom. XXXXXXXX Road to Middle-earth. 2nd edition. London: HarperCollins Grafton, 1992.Snorri Sturluson. Edda trans. Anthony Faulkes. London: J.M. Dent & Co.Everyman, 1987.Timmons, Daniel. “Free Will” in J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopedia: Scholarship andCritical Assessment. Ed. Michael D.C. Drout. New York: Routledge, 2007.Weinreich, Frank. “Brief Considerations on Determinism in Reality andFiction.” In Tolkien and Modernity, vol. 1. Zollikofen: WalkingTree Publishers, 2006.183Tolkien’s texts copyright ©2009 XXXXXXXX Tolkien TrustNOTES AND DOCUMENTSFate and Free WillJ.R.R. TOLKIENEdited by Carl F. HostetterSometime after January 1968, Tolkien turned again to considerations of twoQuenya words encountered and glossed in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, ambar ‘world’and umbar ‘fate,’ and of their precise meanings and etymological and semanticrelationship.1 Amidst a linguistic discussion of certain points of Elvish phonology,Tolkien cited the Eldarin base MBAR underlying both these Quenya words, aswell as the related Sindarin forms amar ‘world’ and amarth ‘fate’ :MBAR: basically “settle, establish” but with a considerable semantic development, being especially applied to ‘settlement’, sc. the settling of aplace, occupation (permanently) and ordering of a region as a ‘home’ (ofa family or people) > to erect (permanent) buildings, dwellings? 2Tolkien goes on to cite various derivatives of this base, including:Q[uenya] and T[elerin] ambar, S[indarin] amar ‘world,’ ‘the great habitation.’Beneath these glosses he added a note of clarification:XXXXXXXX full implications of this word cannot be understood without reference to Eldarin views and ideas concerning ‘fate’ and ‘free will.’ (See noteon these points.) XXXXXXXX sense ‘world’—applied usually to this Earth—ismainly derived from sense ‘settlement’: ‘the great habitation’ ()as ‘home of speaking creatures’ esp. Elves and Men. (ambar ‘world’ differed from Arda in reference. Arda meant ‘realm’ & was this earth as therealm ruled by Manwe (the Elder King) vice-regent of Eru, for benefit ofthe Children of Eru.) But though mbar- was naturally mostly used of theactivities and purposes of rational creatures, it was not limited to these.It thus could refer to the conditions and established (physical) processesof the Earth (as established at its Creation directly or mediately by Eru),which was part of Eä, the Universe. And so approached in some uses thesense ‘Fate’, according to Eldarin thought on the subject. Thus Q. ambarmenie “the way of the world” (“world” by the way never meant “people”),the fixed, and by ‘creatures’ unalterable, conditions in which they lived.XXXXXXXXn, a little further on in this discussion of derivatives of MBAR, Tolkiencites:184J.R.R. TolkienS[indarin] amarth, ‘Fate.’ This sense is an application of the basic sense,augmented by its formation, of mbar: ‘permanent establishment/order’;‘Fate’ especially (when applied to the future): sc. the order and conditionsof the physical world (or of Eä in general) as far as established and preordained at Creation, and that part of this ordained order which affectedan individual with a will, as being immutable by his personal will.XXXXXXXX “note on these points” that Tolkien refers to here in connection with fateand free will arose in an earlier version of this same discussion of certain strictlylinguistic points, beginning on a sheet which Tolkien subsequently titled “Fate”(after bracketing the discussion of MBAR and striking out the more strictly linguistic discussion that preceded it), and continuing on for four more pages, thefirst of which Tolkien titled “Fate and Free Will.” Part of the note exists in twoversions, sc. those paragraphs numbered here as §4 through §6. I give here thereading of the second version, which for the most part follows the first versionvery closely, but interpolate into the body of the text one significant paragraph(here numbered §7 and set in brackets) of the first version that is lacking in thesecond version.As is typical of Tolkien, he begins in a careful hand, but soon lapses into anincreasingly hasty scrawl, with the result that some words, and particularly thefinal paragraphs, are very difficult to interpret. I give all uncertain readings insquare brackets with a query mark. I have editorially omitted a few brief technical passages of strictly phonological discussion (indicated by ellipses), silentlyincorporated all insertions, provided some necessary punctuation, altered someof Tolkien’s square brackets (of no apparent special significance) to parentheses,expanded some abbreviations, repositioned some notes to stand nearer to theirantecedent text, and numbered each paragraph. All other editorial alterationsand indications are set in square brackets.§1. MBAR ‘settle, establish’ (hence also, settle a place, settle in a place,establish one’s home) also to erect (permanent buildings, dwellings, etc.);extended form ṃbarat- with greater intensity . . . > Common Eldarinṃbar’tă ‘permanent establishment’ > fate of the world in general as, or asfar as, established and pre-ordained from creation; and that part of this‘fate’ which affected an individual person, and not open to modificationby his free will.*§2. *E.g. one of the Eldar would have said that for all Elves and Menthe shape, condition, and therefore the past and future physical development and destiny of this ‘earth’ was determined and beyond theirpower to change, indeed beyond the power even of the Valar to alterin any large and permanent way. ([Marginal note:] XXXXXXXXy distinguishedbetween “change” and redirection. Thus any ‘rational [?will-user]’could in a small way move, re-direct, stop, or destroy objects in the185Fate and Free Willworld; but he could not “change” into something else.3 XXXXXXXXy did not confuse analysis with change, e.g. water / steam, oxygen hydrogen.) XXXXXXXXDownfall of Númenor was ‘a miracle’ as we might say, or as they adirect action of Eru within time that altered the previous scheme for allremaining time. XXXXXXXXy would probably also have said that Bilbo was‘fated’ to find the Ring, but not necessarily to surrender it; and then ifBilbo surrendered it Frodo was fated to go on his mission, but not necessarily to destroy the Ring—which in fact he did not do. XXXXXXXXy wouldhave added that if the downfall of Sauron and the destruction of theRing was part of Fate (or Eru’s Plan) then if Bilbo had retained theRing and refused to surrender it, some other means would have arisenby which Sauron was frustrated. Just as when Frodo’s will proved inthe end inadequate, a means for the Ring’s destruction immediatelyappeared—being kept in reserve by Eru as it were.§3. In Q. ṃbar’tă > umbart > umbar (genitive umbarto) ‘Fate’. . . in S. amarth.. . . XXXXXXXX word from the simple stem mbar- . . . was ambara ‘establishment’,Q. ambar ‘the world’, T. ambar, S. *amar (not found). This was to [the]Eldar more obviously related to ṃbar’ta than we might feel it to be, since‘fate’ so far [as] they recognized it was conceived as a much more physical obstacle to will.§4. XXXXXXXXy would not have denied that (say) a man was (may have been)“fated” to meet an enemy of his at a certain time and place, but theywould have denied that he was “fated” then to speak to him in terms ofhatred, or to slay him. “Will” at a certain grade must enter into many ofthe complex motions leading to a meeting of persons; but the Eldar heldthat only those efforts of “will” were “free” which were directed to a fullyaware purpose. On a journey a man may turn aside, choosing this or thatway—e.g. to avoid a marsh, or a steep hill—but this decision is mostlyintuitive or half-conscious (as that of an irrational animal) and has onlyan immediate object of easing his journey. His setting-out may have beena free decision, to achieve some object,* but his actual course was largelyunder physical direction—and it might have led to/or missed a meeting ofimportance. It was this aspect of “chance” that was included in umbar.See L.R. III p. 360: “a chance-meeting as we say in Middle-earth.” Thatwas said by Gandalf of his meeting with Thorin in Bree, which led tothe visit to Bilbo. For this “chance,” not purposed or even thought of byeither Thorin or Gandalf, made contact with Gandalf ’s “will,” and hisfixed purpose and designs for the protection of the NW frontiers againstthe power of Sauron. If Gandalf had been different in character, or ifhe had not seized the opportunity, the “chance” would, as it were, havefailed to “go off ” (misfired). Gandalf was not “fated” to act as he did186J.R.R. Tolkienthen. (Indeed his actions were most odd, idiosyncratic, and unexpectable:Gandalf was a powerful “free will” let loose, as it were, among the physical “chances” of the world).4§5. *Thus if a man set out on a journey with the purpose of finding hisenemy, and the purpose then of doing this or that (pardoning him /asking his pardon / cursing him / seeking to slay him): That purposegoverns the whole process. It may be frustrated by “chance” (—in facthe never met him—) or it may be helped by chance (—in fact againstlikelihood he did meet him), but in the latter case if he did evil hecould not [?throw] the blame on “chance”.§6. Umbar thus relates to the net-work of “chances” (largely physical)which is, or is not, used by rational persons with ‘free will.’ That aspect ofthings which we might include in Fate—the ‘determination’ that we eachcarry about with us in our given created character (which later acts andexperience may modify but not fundamentally change) was not includedin Umbar by the Eldar; who said that if it was in any way similar it was ona different ‘plane.’ But the ultimate problem of Free Will in its relationto the Foreknowledge of a Designer (both of the plane of Umbar and of theMind and the blending of both in Incarnate Mind), Eru, “the Author ofthe Great Tale,” was of course not resolved by the Eldar.[§7. But they would have said it is the continual clash of umbar, the‘chances’ of ambar as a fixed arrangement which continues to work outinevitably (except only for ‘miracle’ a direct or mediate intervention ofEru, from outside umbar and ambar), and purposeful will that [?ramifies]a story [or] tale (as an excerpt from the total drama of which Eru isthe Author or as that Drama itself). Until the appearance of Will all ismere preparation, interesting only on a quite different & lower plane:like mathematics or observing the physical [?events] of the world or in asmall way the workings of a machine. Will first appeared with the Ainur/Valar, but except for Melkor and those he dominated their wills being in accord with Eru effected little change in Ambar or deflected Umbar.]5§8. XXXXXXXXy said that, though this likeness is only a ‘likeness,’ not an equation, the nearest experience of the Incarnates to this problem is to befound in the author of a tale. XXXXXXXX author is not in the tale in one sense,yet it all proceeds from him (and what was in him), so that he is presentall the time.* Now while composing the tale he may have certain generaldesigns (the plot for instance), and he may have a clear conception of thecharacter (independent of the particular tale) of each feigned actor. Butthose are the limits of his ‘foreknowledge.’ Many authors have recorded187Fate and Free Willthe feeling that one of their actors ‘comes alive’ as it were, and doesthings that were not foreseen at all at the outset and may modify in asmall or even large way the process of the tale thereafter. All such unforeseen actions or events are, however, taken up to become integral parts ofthe tale when finally concluded. Now when that has been done, then theauthor’s ‘foreknowledge’ is complete, and nothing can happen, be said,or done, that he does not know of and will/or allow to be. Even so, someof the Eldarin philosophers ventured to say, it was with Eru.§9. *If one ‘character’ in the tale is the author then he becomes as itwere only a lesser and partial picture of the author in imagined circumstances.XXXXXXXX note originally ended here, about a third of the way down the page; but ata later point (judging by the change of writing implement), Tolkien added onemore very rough and faint paragraph (readings marked here as uncertain arefor the most part very uncertain indeed), apparently applying the simile of “theauthor of a tale” to his cosmogonic myth:§10. [? ?] Music of Ainur ancient legend from Valinorean days. Firs[t]stage the music or ‘concert’ of voices and instruments—Eru takes upalterations by [?the] created wills (‘good’ or bad) and adds of His own.Second stage the theme now [?transformed is provided with] a Tale andpresented as visible drama to the Ainur [?bounded but great.] Eru hadnot [?complete] foreknowledge, but [?after it His] foreknowledge was[?complete] to the smallest detail—but [?He] did not reveal it all. Heveiled the latter part from the eyes of the Valar who were to be actors.NOTESI am grateful to Christopher Tolkien for providing me with a photocopy of these texts and for his assistance in reading the more nearlyillegible portions; and further to the Tolkien Estate for their kindgrant of permission to publish these texts here.1 XXXXXXXXse notes date to no earlier than 1968, since they were writtenon discarded Allen & Unwin publishing notices dated January 1968.Tolkien had already written extensively on the same topic in notesdating to the mid-1960s: see Tolkien’s “Words, Phrases & Passages inXXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,” published in Parma Eldalamberon XVII (in particular 104–10, 123–4, and 163–4). XXXXXXXXse earlier notes likewise rangebeyond strictly linguistic discussion into the nature and relations offate and the created world, and as such have direct bearing on thediscussion presented here and should be consulted by the reader.188J.R.R. Tolkien2 XXXXXXXX query mark is Tolkien’s own. XXXXXXXX symbol “>” is commonly usedin linguistics to mean “yielded”, either in form (by phonological development) or meaning (by semantic variation). Here the meaning isthat from the basic sense ‘settle, establish’ arose the sense “to erectpermanent buildings or dwellings.”3 In keeping with the sense of the rest of this marginal note, Tolkien’sintent here may have been to write “he could not change them intosomething else,” referring to the preceding objects, which can be alteredin form or state (as water to steam) or even analyzed into constituentelements (oxygen and hydrogen), but cannot be changed into anotherthing entirely.4 Cf. also Gandalf ’s statement, “I did no more than follow the lead of‘chance’” in “XXXXXXXX Quest of Erebor” (Unfinished Tales 322).5 This paragraph, interpolated from the first version of the note, continues with a partial sentence: “Ambar is complex enough, but onlyEru who made and designed both Ambar (the processes of Eä).”Tolkien interrupted the sentence at this point to provide an etymological note on Eä, which reads: “Ea ‘it is’ only = the total of Ambar: the given material and its processes of change. Outside Ea is theworld/sphere of aware purpose and will.” This was followed at thebottom of the page by an etymological note on the Quenya word for‘will’ :?DEL: Q. lēle, v[erb] lelya (lelinye). To will with consciouspurpose, immediate or remote. To be willing, to assent,consent, agree—quite different, for it partakes of will butis an additional [?accident]. A man may say ‘I [?wish],I agree, I will’ to some proposition of another withoutspecial purpose of his own (but he may also have reflectedthat it fits in with some design of his own and so agree toit as he might not otherwise have done).XXXXXXXX top of the next page begins the second version of the text.WORKS CITEDTolkien, J.R.R., Words, Phrases & Passages in “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings” ed.Christopher Gilson. Mountain View, CA: Parma Eldelamberon, 2007. Parma Eldalamberon no. 17.189Copyright © West Virginia University PressTolkien’s texts copyright ©2009 XXXXXXXX Tolkien TrustJ.R.R. Tolkien and XXXXXXXX Wanderer: From Edition toApplicationSTUART D. LEETowards the end of his Valedictory Address, presented on the 5th June 1959, Professor Tolkien chose, by way of conclusion, to readthe famous ubi sunt lines from the Old English poem XXXXXXXX Wanderer:If then with understanding I contemplate this venerablefoundation, I now myself frōd in ferðe am moved to exclaim:Hwǽr cwóm mearh, hwær cwóm mago? Hwǽr cwóm máþþumgyfa?Hwǽr cwóm symbla gesetu? Hwǽr sindon seledréamas?Éalá, beorht bune! Éalá, byrnwiga!Éalá, þéodnes þrym! Hú seo þrág gewát,genáp under niht-helm, swá heo nó wǽre!Where is the horse gone, where the young rider? Where nowthe giver of gifts? Where are the seats at the feasting gone?Where are the merry sounds in the hall? Alas, the bright goblet! Alas, the knight and his hauberk! Alas, the glory of theking! How that hour has departed, dark under the shadow ofnight, as had it never been! (MC, 239)Douglas Gray, who was present at the lecture recalls:. . . there was a stillness in the room as if the Green Knighthimself had come in. He really understood, as few medievalists do, the importance of “performance” for medievalliterature. (21)Over thirty years before his final lecture, Tolkien remarked that theselines were:Deservedly famous.1 One of the best expressions of this motive in literature . . . we do not gain much from the argumentof scholars as to whether it is a native or a learned motive.We might say it is a human motive! . . . And the question“where are” of the departed has been asked (as one mightexpect) in many languages. (A 38, f. 36v)2For many reasons the choice of these lines was fitting. XXXXXXXXy focus ontransience, and no doubt Professor Tolkien himself saw this as a moment190Stuart D. Leeof passing. More importantly, as we shall see by consulting Tolkien’s work(predominantly his unpublished material), he engaged with this poem ona regular basis; and, by exploring these interactions, we can draw someinteresting conclusions about Tolkien and his scholarship.Before proceeding with the analysis of Tolkien’s interaction with thepoem, it is worth reminding ourselves of the original text. XXXXXXXX Wandereris an Old English poem. It survives in a single copy in XXXXXXXX Exeter Book (ff.76v-78r), and is usually described as an elegy (and thus part of a seriesof Old English elegies, including such poems as XXXXXXXX Ruin, XXXXXXXX Seafarer,etc.). It is a powerful poem detailing an individual’s exile from society, hislonely wanderings, and at the same time it touches on themes of generalloss.XXXXXXXX structure of the poem is fairly straightforward in one way, in thatit has an opening and closing (almost like a prologue and epilogue), andin between is a lengthy speech by a single protagonist (but, as we will seelater, the number of people speaking in the poem is not without debate).It begins with an image of a lonely individual suffering hardship (ll. 1-4).This, it is generally assumed, is the wanderer of the title, who we discoverto be an outcast, pacing the earth without the solace of friends, relations,or lords (ll. 8-10)—a near death-sentence in the early Middle Ages. XXXXXXXXpoet then proceeds to explore a range of ideas and topics familiar toother Old English poems opening up from a single incident (the exiledwanderer of the poem’s title) to wider issues concerning the nature ofsuffering, and the transitory nature of existence.As it stands it is a Christian poem. Yet, on the face of it is not concerned with any great theological debate, but instead concentrates onthe plight and personal loss of a single human being, who dreams ofthe past and contrasts it with the harsh present. In his mind he can summon up images of bygone joys and friends, but he cannot capture themforever. On wakening they simply disappear and “swim away” (ll. 41-8).He extrapolates from his own loneliness the observation that all worldlyglory and comforts seem transitory. Although one is tempted to cry indespair at the loss of the horse, the warrior, and the hall (ll. 92-96—thepassage quoted earlier), the wanderer reminds us that everything mustpass. Thus a person should not bemoan his loss and instead must holdresolute—seen as a virtue. For suffering, the wanderer concludes, can initself lead to wisdom (ll. 64-5). XXXXXXXX poet appeals, therefore, to all lonelyvoyagers and wanderers in exile—which to a Christian is everyone, i.e.we are all exiled from Eden and temporarily from Heaven.It is a tale, therefore, of personal loss, but to many readers it also offers consolation. It begins and ends with mention of ar or “mercy.” Thus,although we open with the harshness of the present, by the end we areguided to look to the brighter future of salvation.191J.R.R. Tolkien and XXXXXXXX WandererBearing this briefest of synopses in mind, let us now consider Tolkien’sinteractions with the text. From the outset, however, it should be notedthat Tolkien never published a final edition of XXXXXXXX Wanderer (though thereis evidence to suggest that he had every intention of doing so),3 or forthat matter, wrote any articles solely directed at an analysis of the poem.4Nevertheless, contained in his unpublished notes are a series of studiesdirectly or indirectly analyzing the text. Table 1 presents a complete listof the manuscripts containing his notes on XXXXXXXX Wanderer and this will beused throughout this article.XXXXXXXX earliest datable mention of the poem appears in material supporting his lectures for Oxford’s English Faculty in Hilary Term 1927.5This was just under two years after he had arrived back at Oxford fromhis Readership at Leeds University, and for that term Tolkien was listedas teaching:ExodusGothic (class)Old Icelandic: Völsunga SagaOld English Philology (Morphology and Vocabulary)XXXXXXXX Verse of Sweet’s Anglo-Saxon ReaderKing Horn (Textual and Dialectal Comparison of the MSS)Discussion Class6Supplementing his lecture on “XXXXXXXX Verse of Sweet’s Anglo-SaxonReader”7 we find in his notes a translation of XXXXXXXX Wanderer (A30 C, ff. 13-15), some introductory remarks on the poem (A30 E, ff. 22-25), and amore detailed textual analysis (A30 F, ff. 26-39). XXXXXXXX evidence presentedby the lecture list indicates that these notes by Tolkien all date from theperiod 1926-27.From around the same time we also have another collection of notes(A38 A, ff. 1-8, and A 38 B, ff. 9-12). Included therein is a reading listthat includes texts by Nora Kershaw and W. J. Sedgefield (both from1922) and a reference to W. P. Ker’s English Literature: Medieval (originallypublished in 1912 but reissued in 1925). A38 B, ff. 9-12, are more problematic to date, and we shall return to this collection later on.At this point there is a gap of a few years, but it is possible that material from this period are now lost. As noted earlier, Douglas A. Anderson(19) states that after the launch of the Methuen Old English Library in1932, Tolkien and E. V. Gordon signed up to be the senior partners onthe editions of XXXXXXXX Wanderer and XXXXXXXX Seafarer, respectively. Anderson statesthat, “these editions were essentially complete by the mid-1930s.” XXXXXXXXassumption is that Tolkien sent his notes and drafts to Gordon for finalrevision, but if he did so, the papers no longer survive.Next we have a series of drafts and redrafts of a talk entitled a “short192Stuart D. LeeShelfmark Possible date CommentsA38 (D), ff. 16-21 Hilary Term, 1927Hilary term lecture list for1927, but notes not directlyrelated to TW.A38 (C), ff. 13-151926-7Preparatory notes and lecturefor 1927 lecture. E = lecture,F = word by word notes ofTW, C = translation of TW.A 38 (E), ff. 22-25 1926-7 “A 38 (F), ff. 26-39 1926-7 “A 38 (A), ff. 1-8 1927?Typed up version of A38 (E),ff. 22-25. Clearly later as inA38 (E) f22v there is a pencilinsertion of: “presented tothe Cathedral by Leofric—Bishop of Ex. 1050-1072.”This appears in the typescriptof A38 (A), as “in the libraryof Exeter Cathedral, towhich it was presented byLeofric, Bishop of Exeter1050-1072.” A38 (E) alsohas handwritten reading listthat corresponds to A38 (A)’sopening.A 38 B ff.9-12 1930s/1940s? Eight sides with three furthergeneral statements about TW.A30/1 (A1), ff. 1-5 1937 completed by January14th 1938 Radio talkA30/1 (A2), ff. 6-13 “ “A30/1 (A3), ff. 14-22 “ “A30/1 (A4), ff. 23-40 “ “A30/1 (A5), ff. 41-68 1942Adaptation of radio talk.Renamed “XXXXXXXX Beginningsof English Poetry.”A30/1 (A6), ff. 69-82 1943-1948 “Valedictory Address 5th June 1959A30/1, ff. 107-168 1964-65Response to Burton Raffel’stranslations. F.106 has sheetfrom XXXXXXXX Daily Telegraph andMorning Post, dated Saturday,September 21, 1963.Table1. Tolkien’s notes on XXXXXXXX Wanderer (TW) in chronological order193J.R.R. Tolkien and XXXXXXXX WandererLecture on Old English Verse” or occasionally just “Anglo-Saxon Verse”(A 30/1, ff. 1-82). This was the nucleus of a 15-minute broadcast givenby Tolkien in 1938 for the BBC’s National Programme, which formedpart of the series entitled Poetry Will Out: Studies in National Inspiration andCharacteristic Forms. It was broadcast on the 14th January in the late evening from 10.45-11.00 pm. Christopher Tolkien, when attempting to derive the chronology of these pieces in 1985, provided a lengthy note ona flyslip to the collection:XXXXXXXXre are many different interconnected versions of which Ihave not precisely determined the relations.Those labelled A1, A2, A3 seems [sic.] certainly to have beenproduced in that order, though emendations were incorporated in A3.A4 has a different beginning (the Battle of Brunanburgh),but the reference to “1000 years ago last autumn” shows itto belong to the same time. A2 has the headnote “submittedas script for talk Jan. 14 1938,” A3 the headnote “revisedand timed,” and A4 “revised according to your suggestions”8 (whose?) together with notes in another hand referring tothe delivery of the talk on BBC radio.A5 and A6, also beginning with the Battle of Brunanburgh,are later and differently conceived. On the third page of A5is reference to “1942,” while the ref. on p.1 of A6 to “1006this summer” shows it was written in 1943.9We now know the answer to some of these questions. For example, themysterious person addressed in A4 who probably offered Tolkien suggestions on the broadcast was C. V. Salmon (see Scull and Hammond’sChronology 206ff.). However, piecing together the exact timeline of thesedrafts takes much more effort, as Christopher Tolkien realized.XXXXXXXX collection of material contained in A 30/1, ff. 1-82, is illustrativeof two issues one has to face when dealing with Tolkien’s manuscripts.First, as is widely known, he was a great rewriter and adapter of his ownwork and this talk alone has four separate drafts preparing for the 1938radio broadcast (across ff. 1-40). Second, the exact dating of a manuscriptis not always easy. For example, although we know the date of the radiotalk (14th January 1938) it is evident that Tolkien used the short talk at alater stage for a much longer presentation, expanding it to produce theset of notes found in ff. 41-68, and ff. 69-82, at two separate moments intime. Evidence within the text of the talk, as we shall see, clearly suggeststhat these range from 1942 to 1948. A precise chronology is difficult, but194Stuart D. Leeclues emerge within the body of the text and also in occasional marginalia. For example, in the various versions there is the running referenceto the Battle of Brunanburgh as noted by Christopher Tolkien (whichoccurred in the year 937). In the scripts for the BBC broadcast (A 30/1,ff. 1-40), completed over the Christmas of 1937 and New Year of 1938,Tolkien refers to the battle as being “1000 years ago last autumn.” However, in the later notes (A 30/1, ff. 41-68), this was changed to “1003”(years ago) and “1005” with an interlinear note of “1942” (f. 42). In thefinal version (A30/1, ff. 69-82) Tolkien recorded “1000 years ago—1006this summer \autumn/ to be precise” (f. 69), subsequently changing“1006” to “1008,” then to “1012,” and eventually settling on “1011 last.”In addition, on f. 69v he writes “1943” and then “1945.”Christina Scull and Wayne Hammond (Chronology 257) suggest that atsome point in 1943 Tolkien revised “a talk on Old English Verse, probably to give at the Oxford High School for Girls.” However, as we cansee from the above, evidence indicates that he began to rewrite this theyear before, in 1942 (i.e. f. 42). XXXXXXXX reference to “tonight” on A 30/1 f.57(by this time the talk had become “XXXXXXXX Beginnings of English Poetry”)is quite probably the evening talk of 1943 for the School as identified byScull and Hammond. However, evidently from the note on f. 69v, he wasalso still using the talk at least 1,011 years after the battle, i.e. extendingits lifetime to 1948 or beyond.XXXXXXXX talk, in its various forms, sweeps across XXXXXXXX Battle of Brunanburghand Cædmon’s Hymn; a discussion of meter, kennings, and alliteration; thefusion between Germanic beliefs and Christianity; a brief look at OldNorse; cursory discussions of Beowulf, the Old English riddles, XXXXXXXX Dreamof the Rood, and XXXXXXXX Battle of Maldon; and most importantly a brief mention of the two elegies XXXXXXXX Wanderer and XXXXXXXX Seafarer. Of the latter poemsTolkien at one point states:XXXXXXXXse are the words of men who knew the northern seas insmall boats. Anglo-Saxon verse has many echoes of the coldwaves, and the cry of the seabirds. It is, perhaps, not surprising that the reflective poetry of a people with the traditionsof the cold north seas, frozen in winter, should show two elegiac poems, in which the sorrows of the lonely seafarer area leading theme, and a symbol of desolation of spirit. XXXXXXXXsetwo remarkable poems of individual sentiment, are also preserved in the Exeter Book, and are now usually known as theWanderer and Seafarer.In the Wanderer the poet passes before the end of the poemto the vision of a ruin, and a lament for the days devoured195J.R.R. Tolkien and XXXXXXXX Wandererby time, a poignant expression of a dominant Anglo-Saxonmood: with this epitaph on antiquity, I will end this briefecho of the now long-vanished Anglo-Saxon days.10It is interesting to note how he sees XXXXXXXX Wanderer as a closing down, anepitaph, and this perhaps explains why it resurfaced twenty years later asthe appropriate text to be used at the close of his Valedictory Address.As a slight digression, in A 30/1, ff. 41-68, there is a noteworthycomment on the contemporary situation in Europe. Although this wascrossed through at some point by Tolkien, it is a good example of whatwe shall see later on, namely “application” or his use of medieval literature to reveal insights into contemporary events:Europe & Britain—perhaps Britain in particular—have anintricate complex history racially and culturally. Nearly allthe worst errors come from attempts at false simplificationsin the service of this or that theory. I am not a simplifier,dealing with plain polemic discussions in Nordic and Latin,civilized and savage. XXXXXXXXre is not time to go into all that. Ionly warn you in case you should suspect that I was a secretNazi and had gone all Nordic, because I wish to emphasize certain things which the bewildered and tragic nonsensetalked in modern Germany has made suspect. Believe me Ihate it—though as nonsense it only beats by a narrow margin much that has been written by H. Belloc in the Historyof England. (f. 45)As we noted at the beginning of this article Tolkien drew on XXXXXXXXWanderer, quoting it during his Valedictory Address of 1959. Finally, from1964-65 we have the most comprehensive analysis of the poem in anunpublished response to Burton Raffel’s set of translations entitled Poemsfrom the Old English, to be discussed below.11Considered together these manuscripts and typescripts provide uswith transcriptions, translations, glossaries, and analyses all related toXXXXXXXX Wanderer ranging from the 1920s through to the 1960s with six mainpeaks of concerted effort (1927, 1938, 1942, 1948, 1959, and 1964-65)plus a possible “missing” period related to his work for Methuen withGordon in the 1930s. It is tempting, of course, to consider whether it ispossible to collate these to present something approaching Tolkien’s edition of the poem. Table 2 suggests that this might be possible. By way ofexample, here we have a collation of all the “transcriptions” and translations he produced of the ubi sunt lines (there is no evidence to suggestTolkien actually transcribed from XXXXXXXX Exeter Book itself, but its facsimileappeared in 1933). To an ill-informed observer, this may look like the real196Stuart D. LeeXXXXXXXX Wanderer ll. 88-96 (ed.) J.R.R. TolkienSe þonne þisne wealsteal wise geþohteand þis deorce lif deope geondþenceð,frod on ferðe feor oft gemon (90)wælsleahta worn. And þas word acwið:“Hwær cwom mearg, hwær cwom mago, hwær cwom maþþumgyfa?Hwær cwom symbla gesetu? Hwær sindon seledreamas?Eala beorht bune! Eala byrnwiga!Eala þeodnes þrym! Hu seo þrag gewat, (95)Genap under niht-helm, swa heo no wære!”---------------------------------------------------------------MS: W2 = A38, f 14v [1926-1927]; W8 = A30, f.13 [1937-8];W9 = A30, f. 21 [1937-8]; W10 = A30, f. 33 & ff. 37-8 [1937-8];W11 = A30, f. 44 [1942 or later]; W13 = Valedictory Address [1959]======================================88-91] omitted W9; 92] mearg | mearh, W9, W13;maþþumgyfa | maþmgifa, W9.Table 2: Hypothetical editionXXXXXXXX Wanderer ll. 88-96 (ed.) J.R.R. Tolkien“He then who these foundations with understandingand this dark life deeply considereth,old in heart he will oft remember (90)many a cruel war long ago afar off. And these words will speak:“Where now the horse, where now the rider, where nowthe giver of gold?Where now the places of feasting? Where are the glad voicesof the hall?Alas, the bright goblet! Alas, the mailed knight!Alas, the glory of the kings! How that time has passed, (95)dark under night-shade, as had it never been!”======================================90] oft | omitted W9, W10; 91] afar off | omitted W9, W10; 92]horse | steed, rider | knight, W2; 93] glad voices | revelries, W2;94] bright goblet | goblet bright, W2, mailed | mailclad, W2,W10, mailed \clad/, W10 ff. 37-38; 95] kings | king, W2, W10;has | hath, W9, W10; 96] “obscured under the cloak of night ashad it never been,” W11, “faded dark beneath the cloak of night,as had it never been!,” W2.197J.R.R. Tolkien and XXXXXXXX Wandererthing. Yet is this really a glimpse of an edition by Tolkien? XXXXXXXX answeris, of course, an emphatic “no.” If Tolkien had wanted to produce anedition of XXXXXXXX Wanderer he would have done so, probably as part of theambitious plan he devised with E. V. Gordon (mentioned earlier). Whatwe simply have here are the kinds of notes one would expect to find inany lecturer’s filing cabinet who has repeatedly taught a text. Simply collating these does not an edition make. XXXXXXXXy are still what they appear tobe at face value—notes; the collected notes of a scholar over many years,some datable, some not, some incomplete, some contradictory. An edition by Tolkien would have presented his final views on the punctuation,spelling, and so on—in a far more cohesive form. That is not to denigratein any way the depth to which Tolkien clearly interacted with the text (asophistication, it has to be said, that goes beyond the standard expectedof basic background teaching material), but it is important to step backand consider for a moment how Tolkien himself might have felt aboutsomeone else producing an edition in his name from this material. Onewould suspect he would have been somewhat dismayed.Collectively, though, what we do have is a series of analyses of thepoem by Tolkien over several years which give us an insight into some ofthe issues he considered worthy of exploring. We also have, as has beenrecognised elsewhere12 and will be discussed towards the end of this article, his attempts to apply the poem both to his fiction and to his theoriesof literature.Let us begin with his discussions of the poem. Here, again, we mustbe guarded in our use of the material and rather than cite randomly foreffect, we should restrict ourselves to only drawing on:a) material that taken together shows patterns of consistencyfrom across the years, i.e. points of interest he came back toagain and again;orb) material that appears towards the end of his career andperhaps illustrates his conclusions on the poem after a lifetime’s study of the text and its context.First, there is the title of the poem. Benjamin Thorpe named it XXXXXXXXWanderer in 1842, but many scholars throughout the years (e.g., R. A.Peters) have been less than content with this, preferring something alongthe lines of “XXXXXXXX Exile.” Tolkien also disliked Thorpe’s suggestion and in1926-7 was already toying with replacing the term “wanderer” with “anexile” (A38, f. 13), or even “alone a banished man” and the “survivor”(A38, f. 23). In 1964-65 he was still arguing for a new title suggesting198Stuart D. Lee“XXXXXXXX Exile’s Lament” was more appropriate, drawing a parallel to theGerman “Des Elenden Klage” (A 30, f.115). Tolkien, we can thereforeassume, agreed with C. T. Onions who, in his edition of Henry Sweet’sAnglo-Saxon Reader (1922), remarked that the poem dealt mainly with exileand only incidentally with wandering.13XXXXXXXX title, however, was really only a touchstone to Tolkien’s greaterconcern, namely who was the character or characters at the center ofthe poem—the so-called “anhaga” and “eardstapa.” We begin to get anunderstanding of Tolkien’s views in his long exploration of the poemcontained in the lengthy notes dating from 1964-65 (A30/1, ff. 107-68).He headed these:Some thoughts on the translation of poetry—especially OldEnglish as aroused by reading “Poems from the Old English,translated by Burton Raffel” and his Introduction. With someparticular comments on the text and interpretation of XXXXXXXXWanderer and Riddle 8/9. (A30, f. 107)It would appear that the American scholar Burton Raffel sent Tolkiena copy of his book of translations (Raffel 1960)14 plus an article entitled“On Translating Beowulf” from the Yale Review (Raffel 1965). As a tokenof respect Raffel prefaced this with the address “Old English re-creationsfor a far greater re-creator, whose hobbit-lore has bewitched my wholefamily” (A30, f. 121).Tolkien, in a series of unpublished notes, was extremely critical ofRaffel’s method of translation or “re-creation.” We can perhaps get aninsight into why this might have been by looking briefly at Raffel’s theories on translation as outlined in the introduction to his book (Raffel1965, 11-14), which would seem at odds with Tolkien’s own views (Tolkien 1940). Raffel began by suggesting that translating was “a minor art. . . almost impossible.” He argued that the “translator’s only hope is tore-create something roughly equivalent in the new language” and talkedof “life in a new form.” By way of example, he used line 1 of XXXXXXXX Wanderer saying that it literally meant “Often the lonely one asks [prays for]mercy [grace],” or “XXXXXXXX lonely one often asks for grace.” Yet even thenRaffel is not content, stating this is “not completely scop-like work” (13),and instead settles on “This lonely traveller longs for grace” claiming“it is probably about as much as the modern reader can be expected totolerate” (13). Tolkien’s disgust was evident in his acidic reposte.15 Hedescribed Raffel’s work as “conceited nonsense” and detected in it “theunwanted impudence of a parasite” (A 30, f. 161 and f. 121 respectively).In a further insight into his own views on translation theory Tolkien remarked that “XXXXXXXX making of translations should be primarily for privateamusement, and profit. . . . But publication of the result needs some199J.R.R. Tolkien and XXXXXXXX Wandererdefence” (A 30, f. 107r). He warned that the translator should not “intrude any sentiment” of one’s own “nor to disarrange the order of wordand thought in the old poem, in an impertinent attempt to make it morepleasing to myself, and perhaps to others” (A 30, f. 121r).However, what is interesting for the purposes of this article is that inthese notes Tolkien takes the opportunity to not only attack Raffel, butalso to perform a fairly extensive analysis of the poem itself. In particularhe centered exactly on who or what the main protagonist might be (or forthat matter, how many there were). XXXXXXXX “anhaga,” Tolkien wrote, “doesnot mean just “lonely one,” but refers to a man living in special conditions and is not applicable (for instance) to a man in a boat” (A30, f.113).XXXXXXXX given title of the poem, to Tolkien’s distaste, derived from the “eardstapa” (l. 8) brought with it connotations of pointless wandering (A30, f.117), and Raffel, it is worth noting, almost dutifully supplied “aimlessly”at line 5 of his translation. Tolkien argued that the main person of thepoem had a purpose, namely to “reach a land where he had some hopeof being allowed to live unmolested . . . this is in fact what the survivorsays that he had done,” and equally important he was trying to find people in whom he could confide (A30, f. 117). For Tolkien then, “anhaga”more probably meant “a man who dwells alone”16 or who has a “solitaryabode” (A30, f. 140) reinforcing this with occurrences found elsewherein Old English.17 This, it should be noted, is in keeping with the stanceof many other editors. Roy F. Leslie (1966 and 1985), T. P. Dunningand Alan Bliss (1969), Bernard J. Muir (1994), Andy Orchard (2002 5 n.15), Elaine M. Treharne (2004), Bruce Mitchell and Fred C. Robinson(2007), and the Old English XXXXXXXXsaurus,18 etc, all suggest something alongthe lines of “solitary man/one/being” or “one who dwells alone.”Tolkien also discussed the possible historical context for the maincharacter. He suggested, again in 1964-5, that:[the] Wanderer, and Seafarer all seem to be concerned withnameless “types.” No names are at any rate mentioned. But“types” are derived from individuals, known by expression orfrom report and story, and it is by no means certain that thesepieces had not, or at least that the material they adapted hadnot, at one time recognizable references to actual named figures of story: \e.g./ Seafarer to a mariner-adventurer a northern Ulysses-like character in his old age: Wanderer to an exilesurvivor of a national disaster, sole champion of a King’sgesiþas to escape. (A30, f. 152)Tolkien also turned his attention to an issue that has arisen again andagain in scholarship surrounding XXXXXXXX Wanderer; namely the number of200Stuart D. Leespeakers represented in the poem (usually manifested by the punctuation decisions of modern editors). For example, one could indicate lines1-5 as direct speech (as Leslie does, but rejected by George Krapp andElliot Dobbie,19 Mitchell and Robinson, and Treharne). Moreover, onecould also close the “main” monologue at l. 110 or alternatively allow itto continue to the end of the poem (Mitchell and Robinson, Treharne,and Muir, all close at l. 110, Leslie lets it continue to the end, whilstKrapp and Dobbie open speeches at l. 8, and at l. 92, but only close oneof them). Similarly, should one strongly indicate the intervention of the“poet-philosopher” at any point as Dunning and Bliss do at ll. 88-91?As early as 1927 Tolkien was already considering many of these complex issues, remarking that:At the outset we have a difficulty. A speech is begun by someone unnamed (an eardstapa) at line 8. Where does it end?Sweet (and Onions)20 never closed the inverted commas—though new ones are put in at l. 92. Should we close themin the middle of l. 29 at wynnum? Or at 62 at maguþegnas? Oreven at 87 with stódon? All these have been suggested.” (A38,f. 15v)Notably this is four years before Krapp and Dobbie began to publishthe Anglo-Saxon Poetic Records and nine years before their attempt at XXXXXXXXExeter Book. It is sixteen years before Bernard F. Huppé’s discussions ofsuch matters (Huppé 1943), and twenty-three years before Robert M.Lumiansky’s seminal article (Lumiansky 1950). By 1964-5, despite all thework published in the meantime which suggested a single speaker, Tolkien was still arguing for multiple roles—three in total: the “anhaga” asdistinct from the “eardstapa,” and the poet:. . . the eardstapa is not identical with the anhaga of line 1: heis a similar case introduced as an illustration . . . , the generaloratio recta of the piece is interrupted in lines 88-95b to introduce the similar case of the anhaga who finds his situationof (?) and persecutions in his own land insupportable . . . Ipersonally believe that the eardstapa and his reported lamentends probably at wynnum 29a /where ic/me gives way tose/he etc\, and certainly goes no further than wynn eal gedreas[36b]. XXXXXXXX anhaga of 40 is the anhaga of 1.” (A30, f. 152v)On a broader level Tolkien also recognized that the poem dealt withimportant themes common to Old English poetry. In 1937-38 he notedit as a poem of “individual sentiment” (A30, f. 20), and, as already observed, “an epitaph on antiquity” (A30, f. 21). In 1942 he suggested it201J.R.R. Tolkien and XXXXXXXX Wandererprovided “glimpses of ancient things, echoes of an old world that hasnow forever vanished” (A30, f. 44), but later added that it was also “timeless” (A30, f. 81v). He recognized that along with XXXXXXXX Seafarer it capturedthe “horror and allurement of the sea” (A30, f. 81v) but argued that therewas no evidence of sailing per se, stating categorically that the “hreranmid hondum hrimcealdne sæ” (l. 4 of the poem) had nothing whatsoeverto do with boats (A30, f. 146).Tolkien observed that the initial motivation of the poem (notably theexile of the “anhaga”) was presented by the poet as a result of “wyrd.”This was a concept that clearly interested him and he came up with thisattractive description:What is wyrd? History . . . [This] can be viewed as an ineluctable series of events that marches on, without regardto any man, Cæsar or churl; or as a flowing stream of thingsthat can by some great men, or by many men united in somehope or passion, be turned this way or that: yet even so . . . itruns down inevitably to the Great Sea at last (A38, f. 9)Tolkien did not see “wyrd” as being in opposition to God, however, orthat the fusion of pagan and Christian beliefs in XXXXXXXX Wanderer was in anyway “muddle-headed” (A38, f. 9). Instead he remarked that:Past beliefs cast their shadow behind: the mood long outlivesthem. XXXXXXXX dominant note of paganism is regret, or indeeddespair. It may have fair gods or foul gods (or both); but atany rate it has little hope (A38, f. 9v)He did recognize that the poem was “touched by Christian sentiment”(A38, f. 12v) but stated that “this is a poem of mood . . . not of philosophyand religion” (A38, f. 12v).Finally, there was the dating of the poem. Other scholars have suggested a wide range of dates for the original composition (e.g. Leslie suggests the end of the eighth century, whilst Dunning and Bliss argue forthe first half of the tenth century). Tolkien’s view was that it could notbe placed before the eighth century and favored a late eighth/early ninthcentury composition (linking it to the ominous sacking of Lindisfarnein 793, Jarrow in 794, and the rain of blood in York and dragons in thesky—A38, ff. 10-12). In a sideswipe at some unnamed critics he argued:We have, it is nonetheless murmured, the hackneyed hourbefore dawn; the same old generous patron (the goldwine); thewintry sea, of course; the crumbling ruin, alas!; the transitiveness of earth, yes, yes. But why not? XXXXXXXXse things arefundamental at all times; and they must have touched very202Stuart D. Leenear the heart in England (especially the North of England)round about the year A.D. 800. (A38, f. 12)Tolkien accepted that the poem contained the stock images one associates with the Old English elegies, and recognized that some critics tiredof these (hence “hackneyed”). However, he saw nothing labored in theiruse. Instead, to him they captured a range of very human and timelesssentiments, and would have been clearly appropriate in late eighth/earlyninth century England with the Viking attacks. XXXXXXXX Old English poet, inother words, was capturing the spirit of his time but in a manner that was“timeless” and cannot be criticized for that.XXXXXXXX title of this article suggests another way of approaching Tolkien’s engagement with XXXXXXXX Wanderer, namely his application to a particular literary or social context. As we shall see in both his fiction, and in hiscomments on contemporary events, he attempts to apply the message (ashe saw it) of XXXXXXXX Wanderer in ways that again help to illustrate his interpretation of the text. In his poetry, for example, elegiac images, intermingledwith wanderings or journeys are evident—as in “XXXXXXXX Town of Dreamsand the City of Present Sorrows” (originally entitled “XXXXXXXX Wanderer’sAllegiance”),21 or “Ides Ælfscyne” and “Ofer Widne Garsecg.”22 However, it is equally likely that these reflect his interest in XXXXXXXX Seafarer. Scull andHammond in their Reader’s Guide (482) suggest a stronger link betweenXXXXXXXX Wanderer and his poem “XXXXXXXX Last Ark,” mirroring the questioningrepetition at the opening of each stanza of Tolkien’s poem with the ubisunt passage. This, however, is not entirely convincing.Leslie A. Donovan (697-8) notes that the poem has themes also recalling the Noldor Elves’ exile in Middle-earth, the link with the Entsin l. 87 of the poem, the portrayal of the Dúnedain, and sees parallelswith Legolas’s longing for the sea in the depiction of the sea-birds of thepoem (though one suspects again that a closer parallel can be found inXXXXXXXX Seafarer).XXXXXXXX most obvious application of XXXXXXXX Wanderer by Tolkien is its reusein XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings as has been regularly commented on. In the chapter entitled “XXXXXXXX King of the Golden Hall” (TT, III, vi, 496-7) Aragornrecites a piece of Rohirrim poetry which he then translates into Common Speech for his comrades.23 Aragorn explains that the poem is by a“forgotten poet of Rohan” and is related to the story of Eorl the Young,but obviously this is a paraphrase of the ubi sunt passage.Michael D. C. Drout (2004) considers the poem recited by Aragornand compares it to its Old English “original” and describes this as transformation, noting that “if not for the very obvious parallel in the firstline (horse and rider), it would be difficult to demonstrate that the oneis derived from the other.” This is certainly true when one compares the203J.R.R. Tolkien and XXXXXXXX Wanderertreatment Tolkien gives to lines from XXXXXXXX Seafarer in the Lost Road wherethere are much closer parallels.24 Yet the influence is clear. We have therepeating of the direct questioning at the beginning of each poem (twolines in the Old English of five questions, four lines in Tolkien’s poemof five longer questions). XXXXXXXXse are then followed by lines of mournfulreflection lamenting loss and passing. XXXXXXXX Old English is more concise inits longing, but Tolkien feels the need to revert to the questioning modeat the end of his poem.Both use images one would associate with Germanic heroic poetry(horse/rider/horn/helm/hauberk/harp—Tolkien; horse/rider/treasuregiver/feast/hall/cup/warrior—Old English). However, unlike the OldEnglish, Tolkien makes heavier use of end-rhyme (blowing/flowing/glowing/growing, etc.), with an AAAABBAA pattern (though the lasttwo lines are slightly different in terms of stressed syllables). He does notalways attempt to retain the alliteration of the earlier text but occasionally retains the flavour (ll. 1, 2, 3 “a,” 5 [mountain/meadow], and so on).Moreover, Tolkien makes interesting use of meter—generally maintaining five (lines 5, 6, and 8) or six stresses (the rest), even utilizing what usedto be known as the fourth epitrite (/ / / X) in lines 2-4 and 7—“brighthair flowing,” “red fire glowing,” etc.Yet Tolkien is consistent in his purpose. Bringing the analysis abovetogether, we can note that he is primarily accentual in his verse structure,establishing a rhythm with lines 1-4, changing this with lines 5-6 (andthus the end rhyme), and finishing with a mixture of both (6 and 5 stresslines for 7-8). XXXXXXXX reader, however, is brought along because the rhythm,reinforced by verbal repetition and parallelism, is not lost. Although thesyntax, rhyme structure, and stress patterns change, it is always standsout, and is performed with a sense of purpose. Even the pattern endinglines 2, 3, 4, 7, and possibly 8, imitates the syllabic-accentual pattern ofOld English “D” verse (/ / \ X)25.It is entirely appropriate that Tolkien chose Aragorn to recite fromXXXXXXXX Wanderer, for he himself is a Ranger, one of “the wandering folk” (FR,I, ix, 153), though, of course, again he is not aimlessly wandering. XXXXXXXX“eardstapa” (literally “the earth-stepper”) of the poem mirrors Aragorn’snickname “Strider” given to him by the men of Bree (see also Donovan2007, 698). Like the subject of the Old English poem, Aragorn is in exile,looking for his home, seeking peace and the joys of the hall. He is suffering, knowing the pressure on him to face the challenge of Sauron, and atthe same time bears the burden of his seemingly hopeless love for Arwen.Yet unlike the Old English wanderer, Aragorn does not seek a Lord orprotector for himself, as he is destined to be King; what he lacks, at leastat the beginning, is a kingdom.As noted above a paraphrase of the famous ubi sunt lines from XXXXXXXX204Stuart D. LeeWanderer is linked directly with the Rohirrim. XXXXXXXX connections betweenthe men of the Mark and the Anglo-Saxons have been well studied, as inthe excellent analysis by Tom Shippey in XXXXXXXX Road to Middle-earth (111-16,182). Yet, as is equally well known, Tolkien attempted to downplay therelationship to such an extent that he tried to argue that the similaritieswere there only in a “general way due to their circumstances” (RK, Appendix F, II, 1110). Clearly there is an inconsistency. Modern scholarsconsistently study the link, but Tolkien seemed at pains to distance himself from it. XXXXXXXX answer again lies in his unpublished notes. In previouswork (Lee and Solopova 2005, 200-202) Tolkien’s reply to Raffel’s dedication of “Old English re-creations for a far greater re-creator . . .” wasnoted. He specifically cited the example of the paraphrased lines fromXXXXXXXX Wanderer and it is worth now citing this in full:I have never attempted to “re-create” anything. My aim hasbeen the basically more modest, and certainly the more laborious one of trying to make* something new. No one wouldlearn anything valid about the “Anglo-Saxons” from any ofmy lore, not even that concerning the Rohirrim; I never intended that they should. Even the lines beginning “Wherenow the horse and the rider,” though they echo a line in “XXXXXXXXWanderer,” are indeed not much further removed from itverbally, metrically, or in sentiment than are parts of Raffel’s“translation,” are certainly not a translation, re-creative orotherwise. XXXXXXXXy are integrated (I hope) in something whollydifferent, the only excuse for the borrowing: they are particular in reference, to a great hero and his renowned horse, andthey are suppose\d/ to be part of the song of a minstrel ofa proud and undefeated people in a hall still populous withmen. Even the sentiment is different: it laments the ineluctable ending and passing back into oblivion of the fortunate,the full-lives, the unblemished and the beautiful. To me thatis more poignant than any particular disaster, from the cruelty of men of the hostility of the world. But if I were to venture to translate “XXXXXXXX Wanderer”—the lament of the lonelyman withering away in regret, and the poet’s reflexions uponit—I would not dare to intrude any sentiment of my own,not to disarrange the order of word and thought in the oldpoem, in an impertinent attempt to make it more pleasing tomyself, and perhaps to others. That is not “re-creation” butdestruction. At best a foolish misuse of a talent for personalpoetic expression; at worst the unwarranted impudence of aparasite. (A30/1, f. 121)205J.R.R. Tolkien and XXXXXXXX WandererTolkien’s focus on “re-creation” is, of course, reminiscent of his viewson the fantasy explained in his essay “On Fairy-stories.” Indeed he goeson to state “I might say “sub-create,” indicating that if successful the result may be new (in art), though all its material is given” (A30/1, f. 121).Yet, again as noted (Lee and Solopova 202) this extract explains whyhe downplayed the link between the Anglo-Saxons and the Rohirrim. Itclearly arises from his dual role as an academic and a writer. XXXXXXXX former,at this point, overtook the latter—i.e. he abhorred the idea that anyonemight read about the Rohirrim in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings and feel they had atrue understanding of the Anglo-Saxons, or Old English for that matter.XXXXXXXX second instance where Tolkien sought to apply the message ofXXXXXXXX Wanderer, so far unrecorded, appears in the collection labelled A38,ff. 91-12. Underlying this is Tolkien’s theory of “eucatastrophe”—theultimate form of consolation in which a sudden joyous turn in a narrative presents the reader with the denial of “universal final defeat” atthe hands of evil, or more positively an evangelium in which the readerglimpses evidence of the eternal joy. He related this to the “happy ending” in fairy tales, but evidence uncovered suggests that this also beginsto explain another attraction of XXXXXXXX Wanderer to Tolkien. XXXXXXXX poem presented to him, and to his fellow countrymen, a glimpse of light at a timeof incredible darkness:I at least find more sustenance and support in “XXXXXXXX Wanderer,” amid the present catastrophe (which seems likely toleave Europe in ruins whichever way it turns) than in all thepretty prattle . . . XXXXXXXXre is no happy ending to cyningas orcaseras \of this world/, whichever new names they may givethemselves, and whichever side they may be on, left or right,black or white. (A 38, f 12v).XXXXXXXX comments here tentatively suggest that these notes date from themid-to-late 1930s or possibly the 1940s. XXXXXXXX reference to Europe beingin ruins either refers to the build up to the Second World War, or the Waritself (it is too late to refer to World War One). If this is the case then itfollows that the new names that the cyningas or caseras give themselves,may well refer specifically to “Führer.” XXXXXXXX mention of “whichever sidethey are on, left or right, black or white” is even more interesting as Tolkien also wrote “red or white” as an interlinear gloss. Thus this may wellrefer to the ideological struggles raging throughout Europe at the timebetween Fascism and Communism. As we saw earlier, Tolkien was notagainst directly criticising the Nazis and disassociating himself from theirwarped version of Germanic culture, but he may also be referring tothreat of communism from Stalinism. Tolkien was not shy of criticisingStalin (see Letters, 64, 65, 66, and 91) even after the Soviet Union became206Stuart D. Leean ally in the fight against the Third Reich. However, Tolkien foundconsolation in what he saw as the message of XXXXXXXX Wanderer, by invertingthe usual negative connotations in the poem linked to transience intoa positive, much as Deor does. XXXXXXXX eucatastrophe is the realization thatalthough all things fade, so too will evil men (such as Hitler and Stalin).Evil can never win and its power is transient—the quintessential glimpseof eternal joy. As he remarked in his conclusion “XXXXXXXX Old English poetsknew that at any rate” (A 38, f 12v).This article has demonstrated that XXXXXXXX Wanderer was a poem thatTolkien turned to throughout his career and his engagements with thetext illustrate his academic beliefs, and the complex relationship that existed in his imagination between his studies and his fiction. It could not beargued that his notes contain anything new about the poem, although insome areas he was perhaps tackling issues earlier than others. However,clearly it was a poem that he sought to apply in interesting ways not onlyto his fiction but also to the events he was witnessing in the wider world.NOTES1 XXXXXXXX fame of this passage was long-standing, see, for example, Bright’searly article (1893).2 References are to the unpublished manuscripts held in the ModernManuscript room in the Bodleian Library, University of Oxford. Allmaterials cited from these are copyright of the Tolkien Trust (2009).3 See Anderson (19). Correspondences with Bridget Mackenzie,daughter of Eric and Ida Gordon, suggest that if Tolkien did sendpapers, or a near final draft of XXXXXXXX Wanderer to E. V. Gordon, they donot survive.4 XXXXXXXXre are several bibliographies of Tolkien’s published material available, of which the best is in Scull and Hammond’s Chronology (813-73). Drout (2007) attempts a more interesting analysis than the usualbibliographies, but unfortunately his study contains some errors (e.g.Tolkien, 1926, is listed as 1925; Salu, 1955, is listed as 1958; Tolkien,1940, was actually entitled “Prefatory Remarks on Prose Translationof Beowulf” and not “On Translating Beowulf”).5 XXXXXXXX 1927 lecture list is contained in A38, f. 16. Evidence (unsurprisingly) suggests that Tolkien continued to lecture on XXXXXXXX Wanderer insubsequent years. See, for example, Scull and Hammond’s Chronology(154) where they note it was taught under “Old English Minor Poems” in Michaelmas Term 1930.6 A38, f. 1, provides the reading list for these lectures. This included207J.R.R. Tolkien and XXXXXXXX WandererWyatt (1919); Sweet (1922); Kershaw (1922); and Sedgefield (1922).See Scull & Hammond’s Chronology (139).7 XXXXXXXX poem appeared on pp. 159-163 of the 9th edition of Sweet’sReader.8 This note is written in red ink, the same used at the base of A 30/1,f. 21.9 Copyright of Christopher Tolkien (2009).10 Actually in variant forms across A30/1. XXXXXXXX text on f. 33 presents agood example of this, showing the multiple alterations on this singlefolio alone:XXXXXXXXse are the words of [deleted: people] men who knew thenorthern seas in small boats. \[Red ink]Anglo-Saxon verse hasmany echoes of the cold waves, and the cry of the seabirds [deleted: In particular these are] [deleted: It is, perhaps, not surprising that the reflective poetry of a people with the traditions of thecold north seas, frozen in winter, should show] two elegiac poems,in which the sorrows of the [deleted: solitary] lonely seafarer area leading theme, and a symbol of desolation of spirit. XXXXXXXXse tworemarkable poems of individual sentiment, \[deleted: timelessnaming no man or people]\ are \also/ preserved in the ExteterBook, and \are\ now usually known as Wanderer and Seafarer.In the Wanderer the poet passes before the end of the poem to thevision of a ruin, and a lament for \the days devoured by time/[deleted: mirth and glory swept away by destroying time] \a poignant expression of a dominant [deleted: mood in this earliestEnglish verse] Anglo-Saxon mood\: [deleted: an] \with this/epitaph on antiquity, [deleted: with which] I will end /this briefecho of/ [deleted: as an epitaph on] the now long-vanished Anglo-Saxon days.’11 Scull and Hammond in their Chronology (250 and 323), also note correspondences between Tolkien and the poet W. J. B. Owen (1941 and1947 respectively) concerning XXXXXXXX Wanderer, yet Tolkien’s letters cannot be found.12 E.g. Shippey (Road, 114, 160, 163, and 297).13 For other discussions of this issue see Lewis (1957).14 A 2nd edition appeared in 1964. Raffel originally produced his translations for the London Magazine 6 no. 2 (July 1959): 22-4.208Stuart D. Lee15 Whilst considering this it is interesting to note that in 1971 Raffelagain described his theories, citing R. K. Gordon’s translation ofthe opening two lines of Beowulf (“Lo! We have heard the glory ofthe kings of the Spear-Danes/in days gone by, how the chieftainswrought mighty deeds”) as being far worse than Pound’s treatmentof XXXXXXXX Seafarer. Gordon, he argued, had “failed to breathe life intohis re-creation,” suggesting it was impossible to do so unless you canforce yourself “away from the original” (Raffel 1971, 86).16 See his notes for a 1927 lecture when, even at that early stage in hiscareer, he suggested “Oft doth he that dwelleth alone \live to/ know. . .” (A38, f.13). Similarly, in his translations for the radio lecture of1938, he provided “lonely man” for “anhaga” (A30/1, f. 13, & f.37).17 Tolkien considered various other Old English texts where the termoccurs. He dismissed the occurrence in Guthlac (B) l. 997 of “anhoga,”suggesting this was corrupt and should have read “āndaga” or “appointed day.” He considered a scribe substituted “anhaga” as it mayhave suggested to them the idea of “hermit.” With the occurrencein the Phoenix l. 87, and l. 346ff, Tolkien argued that this implied a“unique and solitary phoenix” (A 30/1, f. 141), i.e. who dwells alone.With the appearances in the Gnomic Verses (Cotton) l. 17 ff, or as theyare now known Maxims II, he accepted the emendation of “earn”to “earm anhaga” as it suggested to him a lone wolf separated fromor abandoned by the pack, or ‘”one living alone” (A 30/1, f. 141v).XXXXXXXX appearance of “anhaga” in Andreas at l. 1351 led Tolkien to argue that “He [Andreas] is called anhaga here, plainly because he hasbeen shut alone in a prison-cell” (A 30/1, f. 141v) and this is “comparable to an outcast” (f. 142). In Beowulf l. 2367ff this is an appropriatedescription for Beowulf because of his isolation and bereavement (f.142v), and similarly in Elene l. 604 as Judas is now alone “deprived ofall friends” (f. 142v). Tolkien struggled with the reference in Hymn IVl. 88 (now known as Resignation) to “anhoga leodwynn leas” stating itwas “far from clear; but it is equated with ‘wineleas wræcca’ ‘forlornoutcast’” (f. 142v). He added “this piece, though far inferior as poetry,or even as verse, has close connexions with the kind of compositionbest known and exemplified in Wanderer and Seafarer” suggesting “itsbasis is older verse dealing with varieties of the anhaga, but that theparticular kind \here/ dealt with \wa/is the outlaw or outcast fromthe society of men in his own land” (ff. 142v-3). He concludes “[aswith XXXXXXXX Wanderer and XXXXXXXX Seafarer] the sea again comes in, for thelamenter thinks of the sea (97)” and thus he “must have had somedwelling or refuge in which he dwelt, friendless and alone” (f. 143).209J.R.R. Tolkien and XXXXXXXX WandererTolkien also looked at the “Shield” Riddle, but missed the referencein Psalms 101:8 (Lindelöf, 1909-14, l. 1576).18 <http://libra.englang.arts.gla.ac.uk/oethesaurus/>; cited 19/5/08.19 Krapp and Dobbie (1931-1953).20 XXXXXXXX 9th edition revised by Onions was published in 1922.21 Lost Tales II (294-8).22 Published in 1936 in Songs for the Philologists with E. V. Gordon.23 It is interesting to note, as an aside, that Tolkien’s first drafts of thesechapters for XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings all date from around the end of 1941and 1942, coinciding perhaps with his subsequent adaptations of the1938 radio talk.24 See Lee and Solopova (2005, 254-55).25 With thanks to Dr. E. Solopova for her input on this.WORKS CITEDAnderson, Douglas A. “‘An Industrious Little Devil’: E. V. Gordon asFriend and Collaborator with Tolkien.” In Tolkien the Medievalist,ed. Jane Chance. London: Routledge, 2003: 15-25.Bright, Joseph W. “XXXXXXXX ubi sunt Formula.” Modern Language Notes 8 (1893):94.Donovan, Leslie A. “XXXXXXXX Wanderer,” In J.R.R. Tolkien Encyclopaedia, ed.Michael D. C. Drout. London: Routledge, 2007: 697-8.Drout, Michael D. C. “J.R.R. Tolkien’s Medieval Scholarship and its Significance.” Tolkien Studies 4 (2007): 113-76.———. “XXXXXXXX Problem of Transformation: XXXXXXXX Use of Medieval Sourcesin Fantasy Literature.” Literature Compass 1 no. 1 (2004) <http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-4113.2004.00101.x>.Dunning, Thomas P., and Alan J. Bliss. XXXXXXXX Wanderer. London: Methuen,1969.Gray, Douglas. A Marriage of Mercury and Philology: An Inaugural Lecture delivered before the University of Oxford on 21 May 1981. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982.Huppé, Bernard F. “XXXXXXXX Wanderer: XXXXXXXXme and Structure.” Journal of English and Germanic Philology 42 (1943): 516-38.210Stuart D. LeeKershaw, Nora. Anglo-Saxon and Norse Poems. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1922.Krapp, George P., and Elliot V. K. Dobbie. XXXXXXXX Anglo-Saxon Poetic Records:A Collective Edition. 6 vols. New York: Columbia University Press,1931-1953.Lee, Stuart D., and Elizabeth Solopova. XXXXXXXX Keys of Middle-earth: Discovering Medieval Literature through the Fiction of J.R.R. Tolkien. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2005.Leslie, Roy F. XXXXXXXX Wanderer. Manchester: Manchester University Press,1966. Rev. ed. Exeter: Exeter University Press, 1985.Lewis, James. “XXXXXXXX Land-Stepper, Translated from the OE Elegy.” Folio22 no. 2 (1957): 46-50.Lindelöf, Uno. L. Der Lambeth-Psalter: eine altenglische Interlinearversion desPsalters in der Hs. 427 der erzbischöflichen Lambeth Palace Library.Helsingsfors: Druckerei der Finnischen Litteraturgesellschaft,1909-14.Lumiansky, Robert M. “XXXXXXXX Dramatic Structure of the Old EnglishWanderer.” Neophilologus 34 (1950): 104-112.Mitchell, Bruce, and Fred C. Robinson. A Guide to Old English. Oxford:Blackwell, 2007.Muir, Bernard J., ed. XXXXXXXX Exeter Anthology of Old English Poetry, vols. I andII. Exeter: Exeter University Press, 1994.Orchard, Andrew. “Re-Reading XXXXXXXX Wanderer.” In Via Crucis: Essays onEarly Medieval Sources and Ideas, ed. Thomas N. Hall. Morgantown: West Virginia University Press, 2002: 1-26.Peters, R. A. “Philosophy and the XXXXXXXXme of the Old English poem ‘XXXXXXXXExile.’” Neophilologus 65 (1981): 288-91.Pope, John C. “Dramatic voices in XXXXXXXX Wanderer and XXXXXXXX Seafarer.” In Franciplegius: Medieval and Linguistic Studies in Honor of Francis PeabodyMagoun, Jr., ed. Jess B. Bessinger, Jr., and Robert P. Creed. NewYork: New York University Press, 1965: 164-93.Raffel, Burton. Beowulf: Translated with an Introduction & Afterword by BurtonRaffel. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1971.———. “On Translating Beowulf.” Yale Review 54 (1965): 532-46.———. Poems from the Old English. Lincoln: University of Nebraska,1960.211J.R.R. Tolkien and XXXXXXXX WandererSalu, Mary. XXXXXXXX Ancrene Riwle: Translated into Modern English by M.B. Salu;with an Introduction by Gerard Sitwell and a Preface by J.R.R. Tolkien.London: Burns & Oates, 1955.Scull, Christina, and Wayne G. Hammond. XXXXXXXX J.R.R. Tolkien Companionand Guide: Chronology and Reader’s Guide. London: HarperCollins,2006.Sedgefield, Walter J. An Anglo-Saxon Verse Book. Manchester: ManchesterUniversity Press, 1922.Shippey, T. A. XXXXXXXX Road to Middle-earth. London: Grafton, 1992.Sweet, Henry, ed. An Anglo-Saxon Reader in Prose and Verse. 9th ed. rev.Charles T. Onions. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1922.Thorpe, Benjamin. Codex Exoniensis: A Collection of Anglo-Saxon Poetry, from aManuscript in the Library of the Dean and Chapter of Exeter. London:Society of Antiquaries, 1842.Tolkien, J.R.R., E. V. Gordon, and others. Songs for the Philologists. London: Privately Printed at the Department of English at University College London, 1936.———. “Prefatory Remarks on Prose Translation of Beowulf”. In Beowulf and the Finnesburg Fragment, trans. John R. Clark Hall. London: Allen & Unwin, 1940.———. “Philology: General Works.” Year’s Work in English Studies Volume V1924. London: Humphrey Milford, 1926: 26-65.Treharne, Elaine M. Old and Middle English c. 890-c. 1400: An Anthology.Oxford: Blackwell, 2007.Wyatt, Alfred J. An Anglo-Saxon Reader. Cambridge: Cambridge UniversityPress, 1919.213Copyright © West Virginia University PressEssence of Elvish: XXXXXXXX Basic Vocabulary ofQuenyaCHRISTOPHER GILSONJ.R.R. Tolkien concluded his 1931 essay on the “Secret Vice” of lan guage invention with some specimens of his own efforts in what he -calledthe one language which has been expressly designed to giveplay to my own most normal phonetic taste . . . and whichhas had a long enough history of development to allow ofthis final fruition: verse. It expresses, and at the same timehas fixed, my personal taste. Just as the construction of amythology expresses at first one’s taste, and later conditionsone’s imagination, and becomes inescapable, so with thislanguage. I can conceive, even sketch, other radically different forms, but always insensibly and inevitably now comeback to this one, which must therefore be or have becomepeculiarly mine. (MC 212–13).XXXXXXXX language to which Tolkien was referring is represented in threeof the specimen poems, “Oilima Markirya” (“XXXXXXXX Last Ark”), “Nieninque” and “Earendel” (MC 213–16). It can now be traced back in allof its details, insofar as they were recorded by Tolkien in surviving documents, to its emergence in the Qenyaqetsa or “Qenya Lexicon” compiledabout fifteen years earlier. It was in this dictionary with two and a halfthousand entries that some of the earliest of Tolkien’s mythologicalor legendary names were first recorded, or those that appeared in hiscontemporary poems were given linguistic explanations. In 1917 Tolkien compiled the lexicon of another invented language called Goldogrinor “Gnomish,” many of whose words he designed to have etymological connections with Qenya, and words from the earlier language werecited in the “Gnomish Lexicon” to elucidate these connections. In XXXXXXXXBook of Lost Tales, composed over the next few years, Tolkien elaboratedand consolidated the mythological conceptions that appear in the earlypoetry and in some of the entries of the lexicons. XXXXXXXX tales included afictional history of the Elves and Gnomes for whom Tolkien imaginedthat his invented languages were their native speeches. In the early 1920sTolkien wrote a grammar of Qenya which shows numerous conceptualassociations with the Qenya Lexicon, but also expanded and revisedsome features of the inflexional patterns of the language that could beobserved in specimens incorporated into earlier works. In the later 1920s214Christopher GilsonTolkien continued this revision, recorded in a sequence of successivelymore elaborate paradigms, and he also compiled various Qenya wordlists. During the 1920s Tolkien also worked on Gnomish, writing a grammar of that language and various word-lists in which a prominent featurecontinued to be the etymological relation of the two languages, whichunderwent some theoretical changes as well.This is the history of development to which Tolkien was referring inthe essay, and the “one language” that he concluded had become peculiarly his is Qenya, although he does not give its name in the essay. XXXXXXXXfourth specimen poem in the essay was composed in Gnomish, which issimply identified as “a totally different if related language” (MC 217). Astudy of the vocabulary of the poems included in the essay, as well as thedraft versions that preceded them, has revealed that Tolkien used somewords that go back to the Qenya Lexicon, and others that emerged in thelater revisions to Qenya during the 1920s. It is apparently in this sensethat Tolkien meant that the history of development of Qenya would “allow this final fruition: verse,” insofar as it provided a sufficient accumulation of vocabulary for the variety of expression needed in poetry. And itis in this regard that the earliest invented words of Qenya would still havebeen part of the language unless Tolkien had consciously rejected themor intentionally replaced them with something else.In 1926 Tolkien had written a “Sketch of the Mythology” (revisedaround 1930), in which he summarized the features of the Lost Talesnecessary to an understanding of the long poems based on the “Tale ofTurambar” and the “Tale of Tinúviel” that he was composing aroundthat time (Shaping 11). Successive expansions and revisions of the sketchwould produce the various annals and historical narratives on whichTolkien worked at various times throughout his life. He would refer tothese collectively as “XXXXXXXX Silmarillion,” and under this name a versionedited by Christopher Tolkien was published in 1977. In all of thesetexts the Elves whom Tolkien imagined as speakers of Quenya continuedto appear. During the 1930s and 1940s he also wrote a more elaborate“Quenya Grammar,” detailing the sound-system of the language, its inflexions, and their etymological connection through a theoretical common ancestry with other of his invented languages, including Noldorin(i.e. ‘Gnomish’), for which he wrote similarly elaborate grammars. XXXXXXXXsetexts have not yet been published, but “XXXXXXXX Etymologies,” in which Tolkien collected words from his invented languages that he derived from various shared “primitive” roots, has been published (Lost Road, 339–400).This includes thousands of Qenya and Noldorin words, though not asmuch vocabulary as in the early lexicons. It dates from around 1937,at which point Tolkien was beginning to compose XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings.Since Tolkien had included Elves, the imagined speakers of his invented215Essence of Elvish: XXXXXXXX Basic Vocabulary of Quenyalanguages, as part of the background to XXXXXXXX Hobbit, it was perhaps inevitable that he should include some characters who spoke these languagesin the story he wrote as its sequel, and so incorporate further specimensof the languages as well. And indeed Tolkien stated in Appendix F that“High-elven or Quenya” is one of the languages found in the book (RK,Appendix F, 405). It should be noted that Qenya and Quenya are two spellings of the same word, like English color and colour.We might ask then whether this later usage exemplifies Tolkien’s impression that he always comes back to the same invented language. In “ASecret Vice” he asserts that the language inventor is free to make choicesof “word form in relation to meaning” (MC 211). Given this freedom,and indeed the knowledge in retrospect that Tolkien continued to inventnew Quenya words over an extensive period, both before and long aftercomposing the essay, we might suggest that he delighted in changing hisinvented languages and that the urge to do so was the primary motivebehind the developments in his conception. But we will see that on thewhole such developments can be understood as elaborations or refinements of the same overall linguistic form, and that this fits the evidencebetter than the idea that Tolkien has ever transformed Quenya into anessentially different language. In this paper we will examine the basicvocabulary of Quenya as it developed in Tolkien’s conception, and wewill see how these words and their relation to each other are comparableover Tolkien’s lifetime and exemplify that linguistic form to which he keptreturning.Before beginning to examine its vocabulary, we should briefly consider certain aspects of the nature of Quenya as a language. Withoutinsisting on a specific definition of the term language, we can nevertheless infer from what Tolkien says in “A Secret Vice” that he consideredan invented language to be an arbitrary system of words, consisting ofphonetic forms and related meanings, together with grammatical devices—added elements and syntactic rules of combination for expressingrelations among words. He said that the eventual fruition of the inventedsystem was its use in compositions that satisfy some of “the instincts thatgo to make poetry” (MC 217); so at the very least Quenya provides ameans to express ideas that have never been expressed before with precisely the same “relations between symbol and significance” (MC 218).Fortunately, when we take into account the many variations in Tolkien’schoices of association of word-forms with meanings, we can observe thatthe actual documentation of such changes takes the form of revisions totexts where the larger context includes other words of Quenya that remain unchanged. Our focus here will be on those words of the inventedlanguage that survived as fixed and consistent features over extended periods of time.216Christopher GilsonAlso, from the very earliest of Tolkien’s writings about Quenya heenvisioned the language as having varying forms which he described as“dialectal” and “historical,” and for which he occasionally cited examples. XXXXXXXX language of the Qenya Lexicon, for instance, is introduced as“the dialect of Kortirion” and “the language of the Qendi, who are theremnants of the Eldalie living now in Toleressea” (PE 12, 1). In the lexicon certain words are said to be from distinct dialects, e.g. felpa ‘seaweed’is the Solosimpe form of the Qenya word filqe ‘fern’.Tolkien’s appeal to aspects of a language that depend on its situationwithin an historical time-frame leads us to another distinction that weshould make with regard to the nature of Quenya as an invention. In thestories and fictional histories, such as XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings and XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, Tolkien included characters whose native language is called “Quenya” and within the fictional world, which we are induced to imagine aswe read the stories, Quenya has thousands of years of history both as thenative speech of the Noldor in the First Age and as a second languagelearned by their descendants and other peoples friendly to them in theSecond and Third Ages. Most of what Tolkien had to say about thesespeakers and their culture is written in English, with only a relativelyinfrequent mention of how their concepts and ideas were expressed inQuenya. This suggests that what we are told about this language is onlya fraction of what we are intended to imagine must have been known byone of its speakers, such as Galadriel, who had experienced so much ofits history herself.To put it baldly, the “Quenya” of the stories is largely an illusion, afiction that Tolkien evokes for us by the careful selection of terminologyand construction of nomenclature using the words and devices of hisown invented language. This invented Quenya, on the other hand, whileit is not the native language of any speakers and is just the personal pursuit of a sole inventor, is nevertheless quite real, in contrast with the sensein which Galadriel’s Quenya is only fictional. Although much of whatTolkien wrote about Quenya is couched in the same feigned historicalframework as his stories, the essay “A Secret Vice” is one of the occasionswhere Tolkien clearly discussed Quenya as an invention per se. Here andin other such discussions it becomes clear that the corpus of inventedQuenya is not simply part of a notionally larger fictional Quenya thatTolkien had in mind whenever he worked on its invention. Indeed hestated that his invented languages were logically “antecedent” to the stories and have an existence independent of them.We see this reflected in the fact that some of the texts Tolkien composed in Quenya were never integrated into his mythology. XXXXXXXX poems“Nieninque” and “Earendel” belong to the mythology insofar as they allude to specific characters from the Lost Tales or the Silmarillion; but the217Essence of Elvish: XXXXXXXX Basic Vocabulary of Quenyaconnection of “Oilima Markirya” is much more tenuous. In this poemthe níve qímari (‘pale phantoms’) aboard the kirya ninqe (‘white ship’) that noone sees oilima ailinello lúte (‘leave the last shore’) might be faded Elves, forinstance, but that is only one possible interpretation (MC 213–14). Abouttwenty years later Tolkien translated the “Our Father” and “Hail Mary”into Quenya. Of course the frame-story of XXXXXXXX Book of Lost Tales appearsto take place in the Christian Era, and in later stories such as “XXXXXXXX LostRoad” and “XXXXXXXX Notion Club Papers” Elvish history is ultimately connected with fictional versions of our own time. But the latest version ofTolkien’s prehistory in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings and XXXXXXXX Silmarillion takes placelong before this. So the “Átaremma” (‘Our Father’) and “Aiya María”(‘Hail Mary’) appear to exemplify Tolkien attempting to use Quenya ina way that was, at least at that point, independent of its fictional use inthe legendarium. In this sense invented Quenya and fictional Quenyaoverlap each other to the extent that Tolkien used examples of the one torepresent the other; but they are not the same.From Tolkien’s writings we know many words of invented Quenya,with their phonetic forms and associated meanings, and an assortmentof grammatical devices for combining these words into phrases and sentences, such that we can construct Quenya utterances using only thesewords and devices. Of course there are many concepts for which wordsexist in English (or other languages) that have no equivalent in the Quenya invented by Tolkien, as was inevitable not only because new conceptscontinue to be given lexical expression in the world’s living languageslong after Tolkien has ceased to invent new Quenya words, but also because there are many concepts in our cultures or those imagined by Tolkien which he either had no interest in giving lexical expression in Quenyaor simply never got around to doing so. We might identify such gaps, butwe can only know about the words of actual invented Quenya; and thesewill be our focus for now.So let us start with a list of nouns from the Qenya Lexicon, givingtheir form and the associated meanings indicated by the accompanyingEnglish glosses, words for concrete objects and abstract concepts fromthe domains of both nature and culture: oro ‘hill’, niqetil ‘snow-cap’, tumbo‘dale, vale’, tol ‘an island’, nen ‘river; water’, kelume ‘stream’, tinwe ‘star’,aure ‘sunlight, sunshine, gold light, warmth’, lōme ‘dusk, gloom, darkness’, vilya ‘air’; ner ‘man, husband’, wendele ‘maidenhood’, atar ‘father’;alqa ‘swan’, lōke ‘snake’, wilwarin ‘butterfly’, úvanimo ‘monster’; hen ‘eye’,nie ‘tear’, pē ‘the two lips, the (closed) mouth’, lambe ‘tongue’, karka ‘fang,tooth, tusk’, mā ‘hand’, rāma ‘wing’; alda ‘tree’, lasse ‘leaf ’, lōte ‘a flower, bloom’, miruvōre ‘nectar, drink of the Valar, sweet drink’, laure ‘gold’,telpe ‘silver’; ondo ‘stone’, anga ‘iron’, tie ‘line, direction, route, road’; lūme‘time’, tuile ‘spring; a budding’, lasselanta ‘the fall, autumn’, ambar ‘fate’,218Christopher Gilsonolor ‘dream’, ōma ‘voice’, parma ‘skin, bark; parchment, book, writings’; lie‘people, folk’, noldo ‘gnome’, tāri ‘queen’, heru ‘lord’, makil ‘sword’, sanga‘throng’, tirion ‘a mighty tower, a city on a hill’, nōre ‘native land, nation,family; country’, and mar ‘dwelling of men, land, the Earth’. Most ofthese words will be familiar to a reader of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings and otherlate writings of J.R.R. Tolkien’s, since all of these words occur there inessentially the same forms and the same or closely similar meanings.In regard to the semantic side of these resemblances, we have to bearin mind that Tolkien never compiled any list of Quenya words comparable to the early Qenya Lexicon in either scope or detail. While someof these words are cited in the lexicon with the same succinct glossesthat we are more familiar with from the later materials, the lexicon often gives more detail about the meanings of words, usually in the formof alternative, sometimes more specific, translations into English. Forexample karka ‘fang, tooth, tusk’ appears in “XXXXXXXX Etymologies” of thelate 1930s as karka ‘tooth’ and in the Appendix to XXXXXXXX Silmarillion as carca‘fang’. From this evidence we might conclude that there was a narrowing and subsequent wavering in Tolkien’s conception of the meaning ofthe Quenya word. But another interpretation that seems more plausibleis that we are seeing the consequences of different purposes in the textswhere this word is glossed in different ways. XXXXXXXX Qenya Lexicon, explicitly subtitled “Qenya dict[ionary],” provides a record of the diction of thelanguage, indicating ranges of established meanings of words, while inthe Etymologies the focus is on the words of the Qenya, Noldorin, andIlkorin languages with common origins, so that meanings are cited thatilluminate these connections. In the Appendix to XXXXXXXX Silmarillion wordsare selected to help explain the meanings of the nomenclature in the text.We might infer then that karka ‘tooth’ was glossed so as to make clear theetymologically significant relation of this word to karkane ‘row of teeth’,cited in the same entry; while carca ‘fang’ may have been cited becausethis meaning of the word better explains the sense of Sindarin carch thatoccurs in the name Carchost ‘Fang-fort’, mentioned to help explain whythe name Carcharoth is translated ‘the Red Maw’ in the text (S 180).Another example is tol, whose full gloss in the lexicon is ‘an island;any rise standing alone in water, plain of grass, etc.’ In the Etymologiesthis is not glossed explicitly but derived from a Primitive Eldarin formtollo ‘island’ (Lost Road 394). In XXXXXXXX Silmarillion Appendix tol ‘isle’ is givenwith the further parenthetical qualification, “rising with steep sides fromthe sea or from a river.” This citation actually represents both the Quenya and Sindarin words and the qualification is phrased to help explainthe examples of Quenya Tol Eressëa ‘the Lonely Isle’ and Sindarin Tol Galen ‘the Green Isle’, one of which is in the sea and the other in a river. It isclear that Tolkien was not necessarily excluding types of water other than219Essence of Elvish: XXXXXXXX Basic Vocabulary of Quenyathe sea or a river as possible surfaces from which a tol can rise; and thisparticular logical possibility is supported by the Sindarin name Tol Brandirfor an island in a lake. By the same token it is possible that Tolkien did notmean the later definition to exclude surfaces other than water; so that wecannot be sure that the ‘plain of grass, etc.’ in the Qenya Lexicon glossof tol has been forgotten. Perhaps more noteworthy is the additional ideapresent in the later explanation of the word that a tol has “steep sides.”This elaboration is a kind of change in Tolkien’s presentation of Quenyawords that we frequently encounter, where he gives a further nuance to along-standing conception.We might also see a connection between this late explanation andthe fact that in the Etymologies there is another Qenya word partiallysynonymous with tol, namely lóna ‘island, remote land difficult to reach’.What these two words can refer to are not mutually exclusive, for lóna is acomponent in an alternative name for the island of Tol Eressea, Avalóna‘the outer isle’; but having conceived of the particular kind of islandto which lóna refers may have led Tolkien eventually to consider moredeeply the kind of island that is implied by the use of the word tol insteadof lóna. And it will be seen that this sort of explanation of Tolkien’s language-invention process only makes sense if we suppose that in writinga later text he retained some of the essential concepts of an earlier text;so that unless he explicitly rejects an earlier concept, we should investigate whether there is a way to understand a later text as an addition toor elaboration of an earlier one that discusses the same forms or similarmeanings of Quenya words. Of course Tolkien does sometimes rejectlinguistic concepts, and we must take these into account in our overallview of his invented language. Even in such cases, since the rejected wordor device will usually be replaced by something else (or we would notknow it had been rejected), a full understanding of the process will require us to consider what has remained unchanged in the larger contextof the replacement. For this occurrence of new words alongside retainedwords in a shared context can lead to the development of more subtlenuances in their respective meanings.Another example where we can observe Tolkien’s varying explanation of what seems to be essentially the same invented word begins withthe Qenya Lexicon item sanga ‘throng, tight mass, crowd’, which appearsin the Etymologies as sanga ‘crowd, throng, press’. In both places the wordis associated with a sword-name Sangahyando ‘Throng-cleaver’, which occurs untranslated in Appendix A of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, where it is usedas the name of a Gondorian rebel. In a letter of 1964 Tolkien explainedthat the literal meaning ‘Throng-cleaver’ is to be understood in the sense‘hewer of hostile ranks’, and he adds: “In Quenya this word meaning‘press, pressure’ had as one sense the meaning ‘press, throng’” (PE 17,220Christopher Gilson116). In a letter of 1972 Tolkien again glossed Sangahyando ‘Throng-cleaver’ and noted that ‘throng’ is to be understood in the sense of ‘a closelyformed body of enemy soldiers’. XXXXXXXX latest allusion to the meaning ofthe Quenya word sanga is the most narrowly specific, but that is clearlydue to the context, and as the slightly differently worded explanationfrom eight years earlier shows, Tolkien was not saying that sanga itselfonly refers to the “press” of enemy soldiers, but rather that this is theparticular application in the compound name Sangahyando. Also, whilethe explanation that the sense ‘press, throng’ is a concrete application ofa more abstract sense ‘press, pressure’ is newly conveyed as an explicitconcept in the letter of 1964, the idea was already implicit in the Qenya Lexicon, where the noun sanga is grouped with the verb sanga- ‘packtight, compress, press’. This exemplifies a sense in which a full understanding of the thought behind Tolkien’s later discussions of the Quenyavocabulary requires us to consider what he said in the earlier writings,even when the specific details are not recapitulated in their entirety everyplace he discusses a particular word or group of related words.On the other hand there are naturally many cases where the conception of a Quenya word has been further elaborated to include meaningsthat were not already present at the outset. For example tinwe is glossedsimply as ‘star’ in the Qenya Lexicon, although it is there associated withsuch words as tintele ‘a sparkling, twinkling as of frosty stars’, tint ‘(silver)spark’, and the verb tintya- ‘sparkle’. In the Etymologies tinwe is glossedas ‘sparkle’, with ‘star’ given in parentheses as an alternative meaning,presumably a figurative extension. In the Notes on Galadriel’s Lamentin XXXXXXXX Road Goes Ever On, Tolkien explained this explicitly: “XXXXXXXX Q tinwe,‘spark’, was, like S gil . . . often used in [the] sense of ‘star’” (61). XXXXXXXX ideathat the oldest meaning for tinwe in Tolkien’s conception should be seenas a secondary development from a more basic meaning ‘spark’ in thecontext of the imaginary history of the language, arose naturally from itsrelation to other words in the Qenya Lexicon.But we can also see that the conceptual change was probably occasioned by the emergence in the Etymologies of a close synonym él, elen‘star’. XXXXXXXX history of this word was eventually connected with a primitive exclamation ele ‘lo! behold!’ which was uttered “by the Elves whenthey first saw the stars” (Jewels 360). In “Words, Phrases and Passages,”Tolkien’s own commentary on the Elvish and other linguistic features ofXXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, written in the late 1950s or early 1960s, he gives adetailed explanation of how eleni refers literally to the visible stars in thesky, while tinwi ‘sparks’ is applied to images of the stars, which Vardaplaced in the dome over Valinor. This addition to the mythology seemsto have arisen at least in part from reconsideration of the poetic imageryin Galadriel’s Lament, where she compared the long years to lintë yuldar221Essence of Elvish: XXXXXXXX Basic Vocabulary of Quenya. . . mi oromardi lisse-miruvóreva / Andúnë pella, Vardo tellumar / nu luini yassentintilar i eleni / ómaryo airetári-lírinen ‘swift draughts of the sweet mead inlofty halls beyond the West, beneath the blue vaults of Varda whereinthe stars tremble in the song of her voice, holy and queenly’ (FR, II,viii, 394). Galadriel’s use of the word eleni would make her simile of theremembered bliss in the halls of Valinor all the more poignant if thestars she can see each night are metaphorically identified with the tinwiof Varda’s domes that she can only recall, both having been devised byVarda as Tintalle ‘the Kindler’. On the linguistic side this came to implythat elen and tinwe coexisted as words for ‘star’ in Quenya, but each with amore particular nuance and different associations through related words:tinwe to verbs meaning ‘sparkle’ and ‘kindle’; elen through the applicationof is adjectival form elda ‘of the stars’ to the Elves as the “People of theStars.”A similar example is the Qenya word alda ‘tree’. In the “GnomishLexicon” of 1917 Tolkien devised a word orn ‘tree’ which was cognateto a Qenya stem orond- ‘bush’. Apparently the closest relatives of Qenyaalda in Gnomish were the words âl ‘wood’, altha ‘shoot, sprig, scion, sapling’ and alwen ‘tree’, the last marked as an archaic or poetic synonymof orn (PE 11; 19, 62). Modifications to the Gnomish phonology led tothe conception in the mid-1920’s “Noldorin Dictionary” of a noun alt‘bough, branch’ cognate with Qenya alda, while Noldorin orn ‘tree’ wassupplied with a Qenya cognate orne, in both cases the Qenya words beingleft unglossed (PE 13; 159, 164). In the “Qenya Word-lists,” probablycomposed not long after the Noldorin Dictionary, Tolkien listed Qenyaorne ‘tree’ and alda ‘branch’; and a few years later in the Etymologies hecited alda under the base GÁLAD ‘tree’, and orne ‘tree, high isolated tree’under a stem ÓR-NI ‘high tree’.XXXXXXXX earliest explicit consideration of the co-occurrence of these twowords for ‘tree’ in Quenya is in a statement by the character Lowdhamin “XXXXXXXX Notion Club Papers”: “Alda means a ‘tree’—it was one of theearliest certain words I got—and orne when smaller and more slender likea birch or rowan” (Sauron 302). Tolkien would continue to think aboutthis remarkable difference between the vocabulary of Quenya and thatof English, where we have various synomyms for our word tree but nonethat expresses precisely the nuance of the distinction between Quenyaalda and orne, and he explains the difference at later times. XXXXXXXX mentionof these words in “XXXXXXXX Notion Club Papers” remains perhaps the mostinteresting for our purpose, insofar as we might suspect that the fictional assertion that alda ‘tree’ “was one of the earliest certain words” thatLowdham knew of the Elven-latin is an echo of the fact that alda ‘tree’appeared already in the Qenya Lexicon.We have concentrated so far on the nouns whose essential place in222Christopher Gilsonthe Quenya language is attested over the whole lifetime of Tolkien’sconception. Essential to Quenya in the same sense there are also manyadjectives, words that convey ideas of quality, quantity, or relationshipabstracted from their application to particular objects. Thus the QenyaLexicon has qanta ‘full’, otso ‘seven’, minqe ‘eleven’, eressea ‘lonely’; ninqe‘white’, morna, morqa ‘black’, karne ‘red’, laiqa ‘green’, malina ‘yellow’; tāra‘lofty’, ūmea ‘large’, vane ‘fair, lovely’, voronda ‘faithful’, aina ‘holy, revered’,tūrea ‘mighty’; vanwa ‘gone, on the road, past, over, lost’, and nūme ‘west’.As with the nouns we listed above, some of these adjectives have exactlythe same gloss in the latest materials.Others were later given more elaborate definitions, e.g. quanta ‘filled,full’; ninqe ‘white, chill, cold, pallid’; malĭna ‘yellow, of golden colour’; úmea‘large; teeming, thronging’; and voronda ‘steadfast in allegiance, in keeping oath or promise, faithful’. An example with extensive documentation is vanwa, which is glossed in the Etymologies as ‘gone, departed,vanished, lost, past’ and as ‘lost’ in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, in the translationof Galadriel’s Lament. It is also mentioned more than once in “Words,Phrases and Passages”: in relation to Sindarin govannen ‘met’ it is cited asvanwa ‘gone, departed’; in the notes on the lament Tolkien says vánie- “isthe perfect-past of a verb stem appearing in vanwa, adjective ‘gone, past,lost’,” and in the notes on the word itself, vanwa is “an old participial formation = ‘having departed’, hence ‘gone, lost’,” and also glossed ‘gone’with the meanings ‘past, vanished, over, lost’ given parenthetically. XXXXXXXXessay “Quendi and Eldar” has vanwa ‘gone, lost, no longer to be had,vanished, departed, dead, past and over’. This somewhat redundant setof definitions illustrates that, while we can talk about Tolkien’s conception,in the narrow sense of what he specifically had in mind when he wrotea particular explanation of a word, nevertheless we can also talk abouta deeper sort of conception that runs through all the explanations of theword and depends on their cumulative weight of evidence for our understanding of Tolkien’s full thought about it.Our main concern so far has been with the varieties and variationsof the meanings associated by Tolkien with a given word-form in Quenya. We have discussed some synonyms like alda and orne, or tinwe andelen. XXXXXXXXre are also cases where closely similar forms are associated withthe same meaning, and Tolkien may cite them together, suggesting thatthey constituted a single lexical entity. An example is the adjective morna,morqa ‘black’, where one of the forms morna is also attested later, with thegloss ‘gloomy, sombre’ in the Etymologies; and in Treebeard’s phraseTaurelilómea-tumbalemorna ‘Forestmanyshadowed-deepvalleyblack’, part ofa long name for Fangorn Forest, in later notes on which morna is glossedas ‘black’ and also as ‘dark’. Other adjectives with two forms listed in theQenya Lexicon include ande, andea ‘long’; aswa, aksa ‘of bone’; iswa, isqa223Essence of Elvish: XXXXXXXX Basic Vocabulary of Quenya‘wise’; orwa, orda ‘lofty’; and pirūkea, pirukenda ‘pirouetting’.XXXXXXXXre are also nouns similarly cited with two forms, such as finie, finde‘cunning’; hil, hilde ‘child’; híse, histe ‘dusk’; koi, koire ‘life’; losse, losille ‘rose’;niqetil, niqetilde ‘snow-cap’; and olor, olōre ‘dream’. It will be seen that thekind of variation is sometimes repeated, as between shorter hil and niqetiland their longer forms hilde and niqetilde. XXXXXXXX pattern of olor, olōre is alsosimilar to that of Valinor, Valinōre, a name that is widely attested from theearly to the late materials; and Tolkien explains the variant form of theending in nor by the fact that the word nóre was “in composition oftenreduced to nor” (PE 17, 107). XXXXXXXXse examples of parallel variation showthat such alternation of forms with identical meanings is a deliberatefeature of Tolkien’s invented language with underlying explanations.In a case like morna, morqa ‘black’, while there is no parallel variation,we can see that each of the two formations is part of a more general pattern of adjective derivation attested by other entries in the Qenya Lexicon. Thus the syllable qa has been added to the root syllable to form several adjectives, such as arqa ‘arid, parched, dry’; fenqa ‘keen, cutting’; hulqa‘naked’; ilqa ‘oily’; laiqa ‘green’; naiqa ‘painful’; nelqa ‘cornered; square’;rinqa ‘round, circular’; saiqa ‘hungry’; and torqa ‘blazing hot’. XXXXXXXX formation of morna is also parallelled by a somewhat smaller set of adjectives inthe lexicon, including aina ‘holy, revered’; melna ‘dear’; qalna ‘dead’; rīna‘scattered, sown’; and tumna ‘deep, profound; dark or hidden’.Of the adjectives derived with the suffix qa only laiqa ‘green’ is attested in Tolkien’s later writings, and for this particular word he decided—atsome point not very long after the publication of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, apparently the better to explain the cognate element in the beginning of thename Legolas ‘Greenleaf ’—that the Quenya word was laika ‘green’ ratherthan laiqua (cf. PE 17, 84). But there is also late evidence for the derivative suffix itself in the essay “Quendi and Eldar,” where Tolkien was discussing the stem *KWA, which “evidently referred to ‘completion’,” andmentioned its use “in the formation of adjectives from nouns,” comparable to the English suffix ful (Jewels 392). It seems likely enough that theconception of a suffix meaning ‘completely’ continues the idea behindthe formation of such adjectives as naiqa ‘painful’, rinqa ‘circular’, torqa‘blazing hot’, etc., even though this was never explained by Tolkien atthat earlier time.In a later note the adjective-forming suffix na is explained as the “simplest form of participle” (PE 17, 68). An example of this is the adjectivemelda ‘dear, beloved’, said to derive from *mel-nā, which continues theconception in the Quenya Lexicon of melna ‘dear’, but with the addedeffect of the later phonological feature that in Quenya medial ln shiftedto ld. Since the verb mel- means ‘to love’, the etymological developmentof the adjectival meaning is apparently from ‘loved’ > ‘beloved’ > ‘dear’.224Christopher GilsonAnd we can perhaps see here a sort of retroactive explanation of whythere are two adjectival forms morna and morqa both meaning ‘black’. XXXXXXXXetymological sense of ‘darkened’ for morna, taken to refer to the resultingattribute, has approached the etymological sense of ‘completely dark’ formorqa, so that they come to be felt as mere euphonic variants expressingthe same basic sense of ‘black’.Synonymous pairs of etymologically related forms continue as a feature of Tolkien’s conception of Quenya. Among Tolkien linguistic notesfrom the period of the late 1950s and early 1960s we have such pairsas albe, alve ‘elm’; ambo, ambona ‘hill’; finde, findele ‘tress’; norie, norme ‘race,running’; úvano, úvanimo ‘a monster’; vanie, vanesse ‘beauty’; yō, yondo ‘son’;alcarin, alcarinqua ‘glorious’; ascene, ascénima ‘visible, easily seen’; finwa, fí-nëa ‘dextrous’; lempe, lemne (‘five’); taura, túrea ‘mighty, masterful’; and vane,vanya ‘fair’. In each of these examples the pair of Quenya words occurstogether in the same context, showing that each must have co-existed inTolkien’s conception at that time; but we can add that he was not obligedto mention both synonyms every time he might want to mention oneform out of a pair of this sort. So the logical possibility has to be allowedthat sometimes two etymologically related forms with the same meaningcould be separately cited on different occasions without the later formnecessarily implying Tolkien’s rejection of the earlier form. Thus in theQenya Lexicon we had tūrea ‘mighty’, then in the Etymologies Tolkiencited taura ‘mighty’; but the latter apparently did not replace the former.For later, in a group of etymologies for words meaning ‘large’ and ‘small’(probably dating from the early 1960s), under the stem TUR- ‘strong,mighty, in power’, he cited the derivatives taura, túrea ‘mighty, masterful’(PE 17, 115).Quenya verbs show the same kinds of patternings in Tolkien’s conception that we have seen for nouns and adjectives. Some examples ofverbs whose stems and meanings in the Qenya Lexicon are repeated inlater writings include: lava- ‘lick’, mat- ‘eat’; karin ‘I make, do’, tulu- ‘bring,carry, fetch; move, come; produce, bear fruit’, lant- ‘drop, fall’, anta-‘gives’, qanta- ‘fill, complete’; tiri- ‘watch; keep, guard, preserve; look at,gaze at, observe’, kala- ‘shine’, mel- ‘to love’; ista ‘know’, qet- ‘speak, talk’;and tupu- ‘roof, put lid on, put hat on, cover’. For some of these the laterglosses of the Quenya verb are less elaborate; e.g. in the Etymologies tirin‘I watch’ is cited and “Words, Phrases and Passages” mentions tir- ‘gaze,look at, watch’. XXXXXXXX repetition in the latter citation of three of the glossesfrom the original lexicon entry shows that when Tolkien gave only themeaning ‘watch’ for this verb in the Etymologies, it was for economy ofexpression in that context, rather than a reduction of the conception ofthe semantics of the verb down to this meaning alone.We also see elaborations or clarifications of the verbal meaning. In225Essence of Elvish: XXXXXXXX Basic Vocabulary of Quenyathe Etymologies anta- ‘give’, for example, is derived from a primitive stem*anta- glossed as ‘to present, give’. In a late note on the origin of thecomparative construction in Quenya, Tolkien mentioned that the verbanta- can be used in two kinds of sentence construction, either as in antanen parma sen(na) ‘I gave a book to him’ or as in antanenyes parmanen ‘Ipresented him with a book’. Here two ideas that are close enough inmeaning to refer to the same situation are differentiated in English usingdistinct words give and present, while in Quenya the difference is expressedsolely by the grammar of the context. If the direct object of the verbanta- is the thing that changes ownership and the recipient is marked explicitly as dative (or allative) then the translation of the sense of the verbis ‘give’; but if the receiver is the direct object and the gift is described asthe means by which the action is performed then the translation of theverb is ‘present’.This is one of the more clearcut examples of how meaning does notnecessarily correlate word for word from language to language, a wellknown fact about natural languages which apparently Tolkien intendedalso to apply to his invented ones. This is shown from the inception ofQuenya by the multiple glosses of words we have already looked at, likekarka ‘fang, tooth, tusk’, vanwa ‘gone, past, over, lost’, tulu- ‘bring, carry,fetch; move, come’, etc. We also see this from the opposite perspective,where more than one Quenya word is glossed by the same word in English; thus in the lexicon we have helke ‘ice’ and yalka ‘ice’. XXXXXXXX former isrelated to helka ‘ice-cold’ and hilkin ‘it freezes’, while the latter is relatedto yalle ‘a hollow ring’; which may suggest the kinds of contexts whereone or the other of the words for ‘ice’ would be appropriate, in that helkeseems to emphasize the feeling of ice, while yalka emphasizes the sound itmakes, in each case by virtue of a sort of appeal to knowledge about themeanings of these related words.A more extensive illustration is provided by the following adjectives:oiwa ‘glossy’, silwa ‘glossy’, latwa ‘smooth, glossy’, ilqa ‘oily, smooth, glossy’and silkina ‘rich, fat, glossy’. When we consider some of the words relatedto these adjectives—oine ‘unguent’, silwin ‘birch’, latsin ‘level, smooth’, ilin‘milk’, ilma ‘oil’, and silqe ‘glossy hair’—we may begin to see how Qenyacan have so many synonyms for English glossy. Different surfaces such asthat of milk in a cup, the bark of a birch-tree, hair that has been brushed,and skin that has been rubbed with oil or unguent, are each smooth andshiny in a distinctive way; although for none of them do we have a separate specific adjective in English.As another example of inter-language variation consider the verbnosta- which is defined in the lexicon as ‘give birth to; cause’, while in“Words, Phrases and Passages” it is glossed as ‘to beget’. In English “givebirth to” and “beget” are often used to distinguish the mother’s and226Christopher Gilsonfather’s role in the procreation of a family, and so we might be temptedto see a shift in the conception of this verb from having one of thesemeanings to having the other. But in fact the later mention of nosta is inthe explanation of Treebeard’s addressing both Galadriel and Celebornas vanimalion nostari ‘parents of beautiful children’. And of course we useboth “beget” and “give birth to” metaphorically when referring to artistic creation or other forms of causation in the abstract, an applicationalready suggested for the verb nosta- in the Qenya Lexicon by the definition ‘cause’.It is also interesting to note that in the Etymologies the verb nostais not cited, but onta- ‘beget, create’ is given and a derived noun ontaro‘begetter, parent’. This might suggest that a sort of conceptual shufflingback and forth by Tolkien has occurred as to whether nosta- or onta- is theQuenya verb that refers to parenting. But these words are from etymologically related roots or bases NŌ and ONO and under the former in theEtymologies Qenya nosse is cited, equated with Noldorin noss ‘clan, family; house’ and apparently continuing the conception of the noun nosse‘folk, kin, people’, related to nosta- in the lexicon (Lost Road, 378–9). Andin a late note these related roots are listed together as ON/NO ‘beget/beborn’, with the words onta ‘beget’, onwe ‘child’, and two occurrences ofthe form nosta, the first apparently intended as a synonym of onta and thesecond glossed as ‘be begotten’ (PE 17, 170). That the same form nostashould mean both ‘beget’ and ‘be begotten’ is supported by the existenceof other verb pairs with corresponding transitive and intransitive meanings, such as transitive orta ‘cause to rise’ and intransitive orta- ‘rise’. In thecontext of a sentence they are distinguishable by whether the verb hasboth subject and direct object or only a subject.We are left wondering if there is a distinction in nuance betweenonta- and the transitive sense of nosta- along semantic lines different fromour English distinction between “give birth to” and “beget.” We saw thatonta- is connected with onwe ‘child’ while nosta- is connected with nosse‘folk, kin, people’. XXXXXXXXse associations could make onta- more evocativeof the literal sense of parenting of children, while nosta- would evoke therelation of an ancestor to several generations of descendants that constitute a group of kin larger than the nuclear family. This could explainTreebeard’s choice of the word nostari for ‘parents’ since his word vanimalion, literally ‘of some (or many) beautiful ones’, must allude not onlyto Celebrían but also to her children Elladan, Elrohir and Arwen, andperhaps also prophetically to Arwen’s future descendants.XXXXXXXX same variety of conceptual connections is found in many Quenya words. Without going into the same level of detail we can considerthe following pairs of items, each consisting of an entry from the Qenya Lexicon followed by a formally close or identical word with varying227Essence of Elvish: XXXXXXXX Basic Vocabulary of Quenyameaning from XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings or some other late text: ainu ‘a pagangod’, Ainur ‘the Holy Ones’; anto ‘jaw’, anto ‘mouth’; arda ‘a place, spot’,arda ‘region’; elda ‘beach-fay’, elda ‘Elf ’; finwa ‘acute, sagacious’, finwa‘dexterous’; harin ‘remains’, hára ‘stay’; hilde ‘child’, hildi ‘the followers,after-comers’; kalma ‘light’, calma ‘lamp’; kelu- ‘to flow’, kelussë ‘freshet’; kemen ‘soil’, kemen ‘the Earth’; koi, koire ‘life’, coimas ‘life-bread’, coirë ‘stirring’;kuru ‘magic, wizardry’, curu ‘skill; craft’; loa ‘life’, löa ‘growing, blooming’;losse ‘rose’, losse ‘a laden inflorescence of white flowers’; lumbo ‘dark lowering cloud’, lumbo ‘gloom; dark, shade’; māra ‘mighty, powerful, doughty;good, useful’, māra ‘good, fitting, proper, desirable’; masta ‘bread’, masta ‘acake or loaf ’; mindon ‘turret’, mindon ‘lofty tower’; niqis ‘snow’, niquis ‘iceflake or snowflake’; ongwe ‘pain’, ongwe ‘crime’; pata- ‘rap, tap (of feet)’,pata- ‘walk’; pole ‘oats’, poli- ‘meal; grist’; ringa ‘damp, cold, chilly’, Ringarë(‘December’); sili- ‘gleam, glint’, sil- ‘shine (with white or silver light)’;silma ‘a ray of moonlight’, silma ‘crystal’; sūlime ‘wind’, Súlimë (‘March’);ungwe ‘spider’, ungwe ‘spider’s web’; and Valar, Vali ‘the happy folk’, vala‘angelic power’.XXXXXXXXre are also many examples of close semantic correspondencewith variation in the formal shapes. Thus consider the following itemsfrom the lexicon, paired with their later synonyms: alalme ‘elm’, albe‘elm’; alkara ‘brilliant’, alcarin ‘glorious, brilliant’; ama ‘mother’, amya ‘(my)mother’; amun ‘hill’, ambŏna ‘hill’; ande ‘long’, Andafalasse ‘Langstrand’;avin ‘departs’, auta- ‘go away’; ektele ‘fountain’, ehtelë ‘issue of water’; falas ‘shore’, falasse ‘a wave-beaten shore’; falmar ‘wave as it breaks’, falma‘breaking wave’; findl ‘lock of hair’, findele ‘tress, lock’; kaima- ‘lie quiet’,cai-ta ‘lie (down)’; koivie ‘awakening’, cuivië ‘awakening’; lemin ‘five’, lempe‘five’; līse ‘sweet’, lisse ‘honey-sweet’; lūne ‘blue’, luine ‘blue’; masta ‘bread’,masse ‘bread’; matsima ‘edible’, mātima ‘edible’; māwe ‘gull’, maiwi (‘gulls’);naiqa ‘painful’, naica ‘bitterly painful or grievous’; norne ‘oak-tree’, nordo‘oak’; orda ‘lofty’, orna ‘high, lofty’; tasarin ‘willow’, tasar ‘willow’; Üri ‘theSun’, Úrin ‘Sun’; wendi ‘maiden’, wende ‘maiden’; and yāva ‘fruit, produce’,yávë ‘fruit’.In many of these comparisons we see that the semantic distance orthe formal distance is no greater than we find in actual citations from aparticular text of diversity of meanings for the same form, as with karka‘fang, tooth, tusk’ and vanwa ‘gone, past, lost’; or the alternative forms ofthe same word, as with morna, morqa ‘black’ and taura, túrea ‘mighty’. It ispossible in all these cases that Tolkien considered the later meaning forthe same form or later form with the same meaning to be a replacementof the earlier one. XXXXXXXXse comparisons of early and late forms mightbe viewed as typical changes resulting primarily from Tolkien’s urge tochange Quenya. We have seen, however, that such an interpretationwould involve an oversimplification of his actual process of invention,228Christopher Gilsonleaving unexplained why there is so much in common between the basicvocabulary of the earlier and later conceptions of the language.Tolkien clearly did delight in the invention of new word-forms andassociated meanings that, as he expressed it in “A Secret Vice,” would“give play to my own most normal phonetic taste” and together constitute “a long enough history of development to allow” for creative expression in the language (MC 212). Obviously such a history must involve acumulative elaboration of the invented language. Added words that arerejected must be replaced by newer additions, with the remainder of thelanguage surviving intact and a net increase in the size of the vocabulary,if the language inventor is to achieve the possibility of writing poetry inwhich, again as Tolkien puts it, you “courageously abide by your ownrules” (219). And indeed, if poetry in the invented language is to employsuch traditional devices as the different degrees of metonymy or assonances of various types, then the language must have such synomymsand homonyms as we have discussed, from which the poet can make hisparticular choices of expression. Such a history of development mustalso inevitably produce a clearer understanding of the diction, in thesense of how context will be reflected in nuanced word-choices, if thelanguage is to become more suitable for writing.A final example, with which we are probably all familiar, but may nothave considered in this light, is the word Elda ‘Elf ’. We listed its earliestgloss above, the full definition in the Quenya Lexicon being elda ‘a beachfay or Solosimpe (shore-piper)’. This entry occurs with Eldamar, which isexplained as: “the rocky beach in Western Inwinóre (Faëry), whence theSolosimpeli have danced along the beaches of the world. Upon this rockwas the white town built called Kor, whence the fairies came to teachmen song and holiness” (PE 12, 35). XXXXXXXXse entries are among the earliest in the lexicon, and on the same page in the original notebook thereis a rejected entry for Erinti “the Vali of love, music, beauty and purity,”who dwells “among the Inweli, Noldor, Eldar, and Teleri in Inwenóre”(36). Each of the other three kindreds mentioned here also has an entryfor the corresonding singular term: inwe ‘fairy’, ňoldo ‘goblin’ (changed to‘gnome’), and Teler ‘little elf ’. XXXXXXXXse represent the earliest categorizing ofthe imaginary peoples of Tolkien’s mythology.In later entries and revisions to the Qenya Lexicon the term Eldarclearly includes more than the Solosimpeli; the word inwe is redefined as‘1 of the royal house of the Eldar’ (PE 12, 42) and the entry for Solosimpe‘Shoreland-pipers’ also refers to them as a “tribe of Eldar” (PE 12, 85). Inthe Gnomish Lexicon Egla is the “name of the fairies given by the Gwalin[i.e. the Valar], and adopted largely by them,” meaning literally ‘a beingfrom outside’ and equated with Qenya Elda. XXXXXXXX name Eglobar ‘Elfinesse’is listed after Egla and equated with Qenya Eldamar, i.e. ‘Elfhome’, “the229Essence of Elvish: XXXXXXXX Basic Vocabulary of Quenyaland on the edge of Valinor, where the fairies dwelt and built Cor” (PE 11,32).Tolkien later gave two other explanations of the name Elda, bothfound in the Etymologies. First there is the base ELED ‘go, depart, leave’,in the entry for which Qenya Elda is glossed as “‘departed’ Elf.” Thiswas replaced by the base ÉLED glossed as “‘Star-folk’, Elf,” with variouscognates including Qenya Elda, and compounds derived from these, suchas Qenya Eldamar ‘Elvenhome’. XXXXXXXX entry for the base ELED ‘go, depart,leave’ was rejected from the manuscript of the Etymologies, but the related base LED ‘go, fare, travel’ was retained. And indeed both explanations of the word for ‘Elf ’ would survive, eventually alluded to in thefamiliar statement in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, Appendix F: “Elves has beenused to translate both Quendi, ‘the speakers’, the High-elven name of alltheir kind, and Eldar, the name of the Three Kindreds that sought for theUndying Realm and came there at the beginning of Days . . . XXXXXXXXy werea race high and beautiful, the older Children of the world, and amongthem the Eldar were as kings, who now are gone: the People of the GreatJourney, the People of the Stars” (RK, Appendix F, 415–16). In certainlate 1950s “Notes on Names” Tolkien explained this by saying that whenQuenya Elda, which partly comes from elenä, an “adjectival derivative of√ELEN ‘a star’,” was used “as a term for the Elves that set out for Valinor,”it became “associated (in Quenya) with √LED ‘go, proceed’ . . . and Eldarwas interpreted both as ‘star-folk’ and as the ‘journeyers’” (PE 17, 139).Over the years Tolkien had also considered other roots as sourcesfor or influences on the word Elda, with such meanings as ‘eldest’, ‘firstborn’; ‘exile’; and ‘the fair’ (Lost Road 356, 368; PE 17, 139). Insofar as alanguage can be used to tell many stories, there is a sense in which a wordsuch as elda remained fixed in the language, while the stories that involvedthe use of the word grew and were transformed in Tolkien’s imagination. In this regard stories would of course include fictional prose, poetry,and feigned historical annals, where the Eldar continued to appear ascharacters. Tolkien’s changes to descriptions of their nature and historywould give new meanings to the word elda, but it would remain the sameword in invented Quenya. This is analogous to the fact that the Englishword elf is the same word it was a century ago, even though it has meanings for many English speakers now that it did not have then, largely asa result of Tolkien’s use of the word in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings. In a moreabstract sense we can also regard etymological notes, philological essays,letters to readers, and any sort of writing that might give play to Tolkien’sinvented words, as different kinds of stories. We have seen that althoughTolkien devised a new etymology for elda that involved a new story aboutthe Elves and the stars, this did not necessarily preclude the continuedexistence of the story behind the older etymology for elda connected with230Christopher Gilsontheir journey to Valinor, or an eventual reintegration of the ostensiblydivergent linguistic details into a more inclusive explanation. Whether ornot such details about a Quenya word were altered, the word itself wouldstill be the same word in the invented language; and we recognize this byvirtue of what the separate applications of the word have in common.Because Quenya is Tolkien’s invention, we are unavoidably dependent on his explanations of the language in English for any understanding we have. As we have seen, where these are glosses or translations theydo not always convey completely and exactly everything Tolkien mayhave intended as the meaning in Quenya. So if we are to avoid merespeculation or guess-work as to what Tolkien might have intended, wemust consider the collective evidence over a period of time and throughout a variety of texts that is sufficient to observe whatever scope of reference or nuance we deem him capable of inventing. As the examples discussed here illustrate, we need to consider all of Quenya from the earliestlayer of words in the Qenyaqetsa to the latest philological commentaries onthe culture of the characters in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings and XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, ifwe want to fully understand the essence of the language. What ties theseall together as parts of the same language are the meanings shared byvarious forms, the words with varieties of meanings, and the associatedgroupings of related words and names that persist from the beginning tothe end of Tolkien’s lengthy process of inventing Quenya. As this language grew through elaboration and refinement, and to the extent thatthe basic vocabulary continued to be intimately interconnected with therest of the language at each step of its growth, through shared use inTolkien’s mythology and poetry and by mutual consideration in his linguistic writings, these words constitute an essential and persistent part ofQuenya that ties together the different phases of its growth. It is in thisregard that they can be seen as episodes in the development of the sameinvented language. And in this sense Quenya is the language to whichTolkien always came back.QUENYA WORDS AND NAMES CITEDPE = Parma Eldalamberon.NT = “Notes and Translations” in XXXXXXXX Road Goes Ever On, 1967.VT = Vinyar Tengwar.aina ‘holy, revered’ PE 12.34, ‘holy’ S 355.ainu ‘a pagan god’ PE 12.34.Ainur ‘the Holy Ones’ S 15.albe, alve ‘elm’ PE 17.146.alcarin, alcarinqua ‘glorious, brilliant’ PE 17.24.alda ‘tree’ PE 11.19, 12.29, (‘bough, branch’) 13.159, ‘branch’ 16.139,231Essence of Elvish: XXXXXXXX Basic Vocabulary of Quenya(‘tree’) Lost Road 357, ‘tree’, Sauron 302, RK, App. E 401.alkara ‘brilliant’ PE 12.30.alqa ‘swan’ PE 12.30.alqua ‘swan’ S 355.ama ‘mother’ PE 12.30.Amarto, Ambar ‘Fate’ PE 12.34.ambar ‘fate, doom’ PE 17.66.ambo, ambŏna ‘hill’ PE 17.90.âmi, ambi, amaimi, amis ‘mother’ PE 12.30.amun(d) ‘hill’ PE 12.30.amya ‘(my) mother’ PE 17.170.Andafalasse ‘Langstrand’ PE 17.135.ande, andea ‘long’ PE 12.31.anga ‘iron’ PE 12.31, RK 401.anta- ‘gives’ PE 12.31, ‘give’ Lost Road 348, ‘to give; to present a thing toa person’ PE 17.91.antanen parma sen(na) ‘I gave a book to him’, antanenyes parmanen ‘I presented him with a book’ PE 17.91.anto ‘jaw’ PE 12.31, ‘mouth’ RK, App. E 401.arda ‘a place, spot’ PE 12.32.arda ‘region’ RK, Appendix E 401.arqa ‘arid, parched, dry’ PE12.32.ascene, ascénima ‘visible, easily seen’ PE 17.148aswa, aksa ‘of bone’ PE 12.33atar ‘father’ PE 12.33, S 356.aure ‘sunlight, sunshine, gold light, warmth’ PE 12.33, ‘day(light)’ RK,Appendix D 385, ‘sunlight, daylight’ PE 17.120.auta- ‘go away, leave (the point of the speaker’s thought)’ Jewels 366.Avalóna ‘the outer isle’ Lost Road 370.áva márie ‘go happily!’ PE 17.162.avin ‘departs’ PE 12.33.cai-ta ‘lie (down)’ PE 17.72.calma ‘lamp’ RK, Appendix E 401.carca ‘fang’ S 357.carnë ‘red’ S 357.coimas ‘life-bread’ S 338.coirë ‘stirring’ RK, Appendix D 386.cuivië ‘awakening’ S 357.curu ‘skill’ S 330, ‘craft’ PE 17.83.ehtelë ‘issue of water, spring’ S 360.ektele ‘fountain’ PE 12.35.él, elen ‘star’ Lost Road 355.elda ‘a beach-fay or Solosimpe (shore-piper)’ PE 12.35, Elda ‘a being from232Christopher Gilsonoutside’ 11.32, ‘“departed” Elf ’; (‘“Star-folk,” Elf ’) Lost Road 356, ‘anElf ’ Letters 281.elda ‘of the stars’ S 358.Eldalië ‘people of the Eldar’ S 190, ‘the Elven-folk’ 326.Eldamar ‘Elfhome’ PE 11.32, ‘Elvenhome’ Lost Road 356.Eldar ‘the People of the Great Journey, the People of the Stars’ RK, Appendix F 415–16, ‘star-folk; journeyers’ PE 17.139.eldarissa ‘the language of the Eldar’ PE 12.35.eldasilqe ‘maidenhair fern’; ‘elf ’s hair’ PE 12.35.ele ‘lo! behold!’ Jewels 362.eressea ‘lonely’ PE 12.36.Eressëa ‘the lonely isle’ NT 62, Tol Eressëa ‘the Lonely Isle’ S 59.falas(s) ‘shore, beach’ PE 12.37.falasse ‘a wave-beaten shore’ PE 17.135.falma ‘wave, breaking wave’ PE 17.73.falmar ‘wave as it breaks’ PE 12.37.felpa ‘seaweed’ PE 12.38.fenqa ‘keen, cutting’ PE 12.38.filqe ‘fern’ PE 12.38.finde, findele ‘tress, lock’ PE 17.119.findl ‘lock of hair’ PE 12.38.finie, finde ‘cunning’ PE 12.38.finwa ‘acute, sagacious’ PE 12.38.finwa, fínëa ‘dextrous’ PE 17.119.(hára) máriesse, ‘(stay) in happiness’ PE 17.162.harin ‘remains’ PE 12.39.harma ‘treasure, a treasured thing’ Lost Road 360.harya- ‘possess’ Lost Road 360.helka ‘ice-cold’ PE 12.39.helke ‘ice (in icicles, etc.)’ PE 12.39.hen ‘eye’ PE 12.40, (‘eye’) Lost Road 364.henfanwa ‘eye-screen, veil upon eyes’ PE 17.176.henulka ‘evileyed’ Sauron 68.heru ‘lord’ PE 12.40, S 359.hil, hilde ‘child’ PE 12.40.hildi ‘the followers, after-comers; Men’ PE 17.101hilkin ‘it freezes’ PE 12.39.híse, histe ‘dusk’ PE 12.40.hulqa ‘naked’ PE 12.41.ilin ‘milk’ PE 12.42.ilma ‘oil’ PE 12.42.ilqa ‘oily, smooth, glossy’ PE 12.42.inwe ‘fairy’ >> ‘1 of the royal house of the Eldar’ PE 12.42.233Essence of Elvish: XXXXXXXX Basic Vocabulary of Quenyaista ‘know’ PE 12.43, 17.77.iswa, isqa ‘wise’ PE 12.43.kaima- ‘lie quiet’ PE 12.46.kala- ‘shine’ PE 12.44.kalma ‘(day)light’ PE 12.44.kaluva ‘shall shine’ UT 22, 51.kare ‘(to) do’ PE 17.68.karin ‘I make, do’ PE 12.45.karne ‘red’ PE 12.48.karka ‘fang, tooth, tusk’ PE 12.48, ‘tooth’ Lost Road 362.kelu- ‘to flow’ PE 12.46.kelume ‘stream’ PE 12.46, ‘flowing, flood (tide), stream’ MC 223.kelussë ‘freshet, water falling out swiftly from a rocky spring’ UT 426.kemen ‘soil’ PE 12.46.kemen ‘the Earth (as an apparent flat floor under menel)’ PE 17.24.koi, koire ‘life’ PE 12.48.koivie ‘awakening’ PE 12.48.kuru ‘magic, wizardry’ PE 12.49.laika ‘green (of leaves, herbage)’ PE 17.159.laiqa ‘green’ PE 12.52.laiqua ‘green’ PE 17.153.lambe ‘tongue’ PE 12.52, RK, Appendix E 401.lant- ‘drop, fall’ PE 12.51, lanta- ‘fall’ 17.62.lasse ‘leaf ’ PE 12.51, 17.62.lasselanta ‘the Fall, Autumn’ PE 12.51, lasse-lanta ‘leaf-fall; fading’ RK,App. D. 386.latsin ‘level, smooth’ PE 12.51.latwa ‘smooth, glossy’ PE 12.51.laure ‘gold’ PE 12.51, ‘gold; golden light, especially sunlight’ NT 62.lava- ‘lick’ PE 12.51, lav- ‘lick’ 17.72.lemin ‘five’ PE 12.52.lempe, lemne (‘five’) PE 17.95, lempe ‘five’ VT 47.10.lie ‘people, folk’ PE 12.53.līse ‘sweet’ PE 12.55.lisse honey-sweet’ PE 17.64.loa ‘life’ PE 12.52, löa ‘growing, blooming; a sun-year’ PE 17.159.lōke ‘snake’ PE 12.55, hlóke, lóke ‘reptile, snake, worm’ PE 17.160.lōme ‘dusk, gloom, darkness’ PE 12.55, lómë ‘night’ RK 385, ‘night, darkness’ PE 17.81.lóna ‘island, remote land difficult to reach’ Lost Road 370.losse ‘a laden inflorescence of white flowers (e.g. of hawthorn)’ PE17.160.losse, losille ‘rose’ PE 12.56.234Christopher Gilsonlōte ‘a flower, bloom (usually of large single flowers)’ PE 12.55, lóte ‘flower,a single bloom’ 17.26.luine ‘blue’ PE 12.66.lumbo ‘dark lowering cloud’ PE 12.57, ‘gloom’ 17.72, ‘dark, shade’17.168lūme ‘time’ PE 12.56, lúme ‘time, hour’ 17.13.lūne ‘blue, deep blue’ PE 12.57.mā ‘hand’ PE 12.57, má ‘hand’ 17.70.maiwi (‘gulls’) MC 222.makil ‘sword, broadsword’ PE 12.58.makilya ‘his (or their) sword’ PE 17.130.malina ‘yellow’ PE 12.58, malĭna ‘yellow, of golden colour’ 17.51.mar ‘dwelling of men, land, the Earth’ PE 12.60, ‘dwelling, mansion’17.64, mar ‘a region settled by a community or group’ 17.164.māra ‘mighty, powerful, doughty; (of things) good, useful’ PE 12.57,‘good; fitting, proper, desirable’ PE 17.74, mára ‘good, as it should be, inright or proper form or state, in health, well’ PE 17.162.márië ‘goodness; good estate, being well’ PE 17.162.masse ‘bread’ PE 17.52.masta ‘bread’ PE 12.59.masta ‘a cake or loaf ’ PE 17.52.mat- ‘eat’ PE 12.59.mătie ‘eating’ PE 17.13.mātima ‘edible’ PE 17.68.matsima ‘edible’ PE 12.59.māwe ‘gull’ PE 12.60.mel- ‘to love’ PE 12.60, ‘love’ S 361.melda ‘dear, beloved’ PE 17.56.melina, melna ‘dear’ PE 12.60.mindon ‘turret’ PE 12.61.Mindon Eldaliéva ‘Lofty Tower of the Eldalië’ S 341.minqe ‘eleven’ PE 12.61.minque ‘eleven’ VT 48.6.miruvōre ‘nectar, drink of the Valar, sweet drink’ PE 12.61, ‘a mead ornectar drunk in Valinor’ PE 17.64.morna, morqa ‘black’ PE 12.62, morna ‘gloomy, sombre’ Lost Road 373,‘black’ PE 17.73, ‘dark’ 17.81.naica ‘bitterly painful or grievous’ PE 17.151.naiqa ‘painful’ PE 12.65.namárie ‘be well’ PE 17.162.nelqa ‘cornered; square’ PE 12.65.nen (nēn· or nend·) ‘river; water’ PE 12.65.nēn ‘water’ PE 17.52.235Essence of Elvish: XXXXXXXX Basic Vocabulary of Quenyaner ‘man, husband’ PE 12.65.nernehta ‘man-spearhead’ UT 282.nie ‘tear’ PE 12.68.nieninquëa (‘like a snowdrop’) PE 16.96.ninqe ‘white’ PE 12.66.ninque ‘white, chill, cold, pallid’ PE 17.168.niqetil, niqetilde ‘snow-cap’ PE 12.66.niqis ‘snow’ PE 12.66.níquetil ‘snow peak’ PE 17.168.niquis ‘ice-flake or snowflake’ PE 17.168.ňoldo ‘goblin’ >> ‘gnome’ PE 12.67, noldo ‘one of the kindred of theNoldor’ RK, Appendix E 401.nor ‘oak’ PE 12.67.nordo ‘oak’ PE 17.25.nōre ‘native land, nation, family; country’ PE 12.66, ‘generation, people,folk, large group regarded as of common ancestry’ PE 17.26.norie, norme ‘race, running’ PE 17.169.norne ‘oak-tree’ PE 12.67.nosse ‘folk, kin, people’ PE 12.66, (‘clan, family; house’) Lost Road 378.nosta- ‘give birth to; cause’ PE 12.66, nosta ‘to beget’ 17.111, ‘be begotten’17.170.nostari ‘begetter[s]’ PE 17.111.nūme ‘west’ PE 12.68, nūme, nūmen ‘the ‘West’ PE 17.18.oine ‘unguent’ PE 12.71.oiwa, oiqa ‘glossy’ PE 12.71.olor, olōre ‘dream’ PE 12.69, olor ‘dream; clear vision, in the mind, of thingsnot physically present at the body’s situation’ UT 396.ōma ‘voice’ PE 12.69, óma ‘voice’ 17.67.ondo ‘stone’ PE 12.70, S 359.ongwe ‘pain’ PE 12.70.ongwe ‘crime’ PE 17.170.onta- ‘beget, create’ Lost Road 379, onta ‘beget’ PE 17.170.ontaro ‘begetter, parent’ Lost Road 379.onwe ‘child’ PE 17.170.orme ‘tree’ PE 16.139.orna ‘high, lofty’ PE 17.186.orne (‘tree’) PE 13.164, ‘tree’ 16.139, ‘tree, high isolated tree’ Lost Road379, ‘tree; when smaller and more slender like a birch or rowan’ Sauron302.oro ‘hill’ PE 12.70, oro- ‘hill’ 17.83.orond- ‘bush’ PE 11.62.orta ‘cause to rise’ PE 17.70.orwa, orda ‘lofty’ PE 12.70.236Christopher Gilsonoryă, orta- ‘rise’ PE 17.64.otso ‘7’ PE 12.71, ‘seven’ S 364.parma ‘skin, bark; parchment, book, writings’ PE 12.72, ‘book’ RK, Appendix E 401, ‘bark; (skinning, peeling off), parchment, book’ PE 17.171.pata- ‘rap, tap (of feet)’ PE 12.72.pata- ‘walk’ PE 17.34.pē ‘the two lips, the (closed) mouth’ PE 12.72, ‘the closed mouth’ 17.126.pirūkea, pirukenda ‘pirouetting’ PE 12.74.pole (i) ‘oats’ PE 12.75.poli- ‘meal; grist’ PE 17.181.qalna ‘dead’ PE 12.76.qanta ‘full’ PE 12.78.qanta- ‘fill, complete’ PE 12.78.qet- ‘speak, talk’ PE 12.77, 17.126.quanta ‘filled, full’ PE 17.68.quanta- ‘to fill’ PE 17.68.Quendi ‘the speakers; Elves’ RK, Appendix F 415.queta Quenya! ‘speak Quenya!’ PE 17.138.rāma ‘wing’ PE 12.78, ráma ‘wing’ 17.63.rīna ‘scattered, sown’ PE 12.80.ringa ‘damp, cold, chilly’ PE 12.80.Ringarë (‘December’) RK, Appendix D 388.rinqa ‘round, circular’ PE 12.80.saiqa ‘hungry’ PE 12.82.sanga ‘throng, tight mass, crowd’ PE 12.81, ‘crowd, throng, press’ LostRoad 388, ‘press, pressure; press, throng’ PE 17.116, ‘throng; a closelyformed body of enemy soldiers’ Letters 425.sanga- ‘pack tight, compress, press’ PE 12.81.Sangahyando ‘Throng-cleaver’ PE 12.81, Lost Road 388, Letters 425, (unglossed) RK, Appendix A 328, ‘hewer of hostile ranks’ PE 17.116.sil- ‘shine (with white or silver light)’ S 364, PE 17.13.sili- ‘gleam, glint’ PE 12.83silka, silkina ‘rich, fat, glossy’ PE 12.86.silma ‘a ray of moonlight’ PE 12.83.silma ‘(white) crystal’ PE 17.23.silqe ‘glossy hair’ PE 12.86.silwa ‘glossy’ PE 12.83.silwin ‘birch’ PE 12.83.Solosimpe ‘Shoreland-pipers’ PE 12.sūlime ‘wind’ PE 12.86.Súlimë (‘March’) RK, Appendix D 388.tāra ‘lofty’ PE 12.87, tára ‘lofty’ S 364.tāri ‘queen’ PE 12.87, tári- ‘queen’ 17.67.237Essence of Elvish: XXXXXXXX Basic Vocabulary of Quenyatasar ‘willow’ PE 17.81.tasarin ‘willow’ PE 12.90.taura ‘mighty’ Lost Road 395, taura, túrea ‘mighty, masterful’ PE 17.115.Taurelilómea-tumbalemorna ‘Forestmanyshadowed-deepvalleyblack’ TT, III,iv, 70, RK, Appendix F 409.Teler (teleř) ‘little elf ’; Teleř ‘one of the Elf-kindreds’ PE 12.91.telpe ‘silver’ PE 12.91, UT 266.tie ‘line, direction, route, road’ PE 12.90, ‘path; road, way’ 17.72.tint ‘(silver) spark’ PE 12.92.Tintalle ‘the Kindler’ FR, II, viii, 394.tintele ‘a sparkling, twinkling as of frosty stars’ PE 12.92.tintya- ‘sparkle’ PE 12.92.tinwe ‘star’ PE 12.92, ‘sparkle (star)’ Lost Road 393, ‘spark; star’ NT 61.tiri- ‘watch; keep, guard, preserve; look at, gaze at, observe’ PE 12.93,tir- ‘gaze, look at, watch’ 17.25.tirin ‘I watch’ Lost Road 394.tirion ‘a mighty tower, a city on a hill’ PE 12.93.Tirion ‘great watch-tower’ NT 65.tol ‘an island; any rise standing alone in water, plain of grass, etc.’ PE12.94, (‘island’) Lost Road 394, ‘isle; (rising with steep sides from the seaor from a river)’ S 365.Tol-eressea ‘Lonely isle’ PE 12.94, Tol Eressëa ‘the Lonely Isle’ S 59.torqa ‘blazing hot’ PE 12.94.tuile ‘spring; a budding’ PE 12.96, tuilë ‘spring’ RK, Appendix D 385–6.tulu- ‘bring, carry, fetch; move, come; produce, bear fruit’ PE 12.95.tumbo ‘dale, vale’ PE 12.95, ‘deep vale’ PE 17.81.tumna ‘deep, profound; dark or hidden’ PE 12.95.tupu- ‘roof, put lid on, put hat on, cover’ PE 12.95.tūrea ‘mighty’ PE 12.95, taura, túrea ‘mighty, masterful’ 17.115.tyelpe ‘silver’ UT 266.ūmea ‘large’ PE 12.97, úmea ‘large, of throng; teeming, thronging’17.115.ungwe ‘spider’ PE 12.98.ungwe ‘spider’s web’ RK, Appendix E 401.untúpa ‘is covering over’ PE 17.73, ‘down-roofs’ NT 59.Ur, Ūri ‘the Sun’ PE 12.98.Úrin ‘Sun’ PE 17.148.utúlien ‘I have come’ PE 17.103.úvanimo ‘monster’ PE 12.99, úvano, úvanimo ‘a monster, corrupt or evilcreature’ 17.150.vala ‘angelic power’ RK, Appendix E 401.Valar, Vali ‘the happy folk’ PE 12.99.Valinor, Valinōre ‘Asgard’ PE 12.99, Valinor, Valinóre ‘land of the Gods in the238Christopher GilsonWest’ Lost Road 350, ‘Land of the Valar’ PE 17.26.vane (i) ‘fair, lovely’ PE 12.99, vane (vanĭ) ‘fair’ 17.56.vanie, vanesse ‘beauty’ PE 17.56.vanimalion nostari ‘parents of beautiful children’ RK, VI, vi, 259, Letters308.vanwa ‘gone, on the road, past, over, lost’ PE 12.99, ‘gone, departed, vanished, lost, past’ Lost Road 397, ‘lost’ FR, II, viii, 394, ‘gone, departed’ PE17.16, ‘gone, past, lost’ 17.63, ‘gone (past, vanished, over, lost)’, ‘havingdeparted; gone, lost’ 17.74, ‘gone, lost, no longer to be had, vanished,departed, dead, past and over’ Jewels 366.vanya ‘fair’ PE 17.56.Vilya ‘air (lower)’ PE 12.101, vilya ‘air, sky’ RK, Appendix E 401.vorond, voronda ‘faithful’ PE 12.102, voronda ‘steadfast in allegiance, in keeping oath or promise; faithful’ UT 317.wende ‘maiden’ PE 17.190.wendele ‘maidenhood’ PE 12.103, 17.191.wendi ‘maiden’ PE 12.103.wilwarin ‘butterfly’ PE 12.104, S 354.yalka ‘ice’ PE 12.105.yalle ‘a hollow ring’ PE 12.105.yāva ‘fruit, produce’ PE 12.105.yávë ‘fruit’ S 365.yō, yon, yondo ‘son’ PE 17.190.WORKS CITEDTOLKIEN, J.R.R. XXXXXXXX Alphabet of Rúmil & Early Noldorin Fragments, ed.Christopher Gilson, Bill Welden, Carl F. Hostetter and PatrickWynne. Cupertino, CA: Parma Eldalamberon, 2001. Parma Eldalamberon no. 13.———. Early Elvish Poetry and Pre-Fëanorian Alphabets, ed. Christopher Gilson, Arden R. Smith, Patrick Wynne, Carl F. Hostetter, and BillWelden. Cupertino, CA: Parma Eldalamberon, 2006. Parma Eldalamberon no. 16.———. “Eldarin Hands, Fingers & Numerals and Related Writings,”ed. Patrick Wynne, Vinyar Tengwar no. 47 (February 2005) “PartOne”: 3-42; no. 48 (December 2005): “Part Two”: 4-34.———. I·Lam na·Ngoldathon: XXXXXXXX Grammar and Lexicon of the Gnomish Tongue,ed. Christopher Gilson, Patrick Wynne, Arden R. Smith, andCarl F. Hostetter. Walnut Creek, CA: Parma Eldalamberon,1995. Parma Eldalamberon no. 11.239Essence of Elvish: XXXXXXXX Basic Vocabulary of Quenya———. “Notes and Translations.” In XXXXXXXX Road Goes Ever On: A Song Cycle,music by Donald Swann, poems by J.R.R. Tolkien. Boston:Houghton Mifflin, 1967: 55-68.———. Qenyaqetsa: XXXXXXXX Qenya Phonology and Lexicon, together with XXXXXXXX Poeticand Mythologic Words of Eldarissa, ed. Christopher Gilson, Carl F.Hostetter, Patrick Wynne, and Arden R. Smith. Cupertino, CA:Parma Eldalamberon, 1998. Parma Eldalamberon no. 12.———. Words, Phrases & Passages in “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings” ed. Christopher Gilson. Mountain View, CA: Parma Eldelamberon, 2007.Parma Eldalamberon no. 17.241Copyright © West Virginia University PressBook ReviewsTolkien On Fairy-stories: Expanded Edition, with Commentary and Notes, byJ.R.R. Tolkien. Edited by Verlyn Flieger and Douglas A. Anderson.London: HarperCollins, 2008. 320 pp. £16.99 (hardcover) ISBN9780007244669.Tolkien’s essay “On Fairy-stories,” which most of us know from its1964 publication together with the story “Leaf by Niggle” in Tree andLeaf, had been through two public appearances and several versions before that date. In 1938 Tolkien was asked if he would give the annualAndrew Lang Lecture at the University of St Andrews, Scotland, andchose the topic of fairy tales, which had been very much a concern ofLang’s. Tolkien had already been thinking about the association of fairytales with children, and the lecture gave him the chance to argue that thisassociation was in fact an accident. He was intending to write a majorfairy tale, and wanted to argue that such writing was and always hadbeen matter for adults. A public platform on which to demonstrate thiscame at just the right time. Immediately after the lecture he resumed thewriting of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, which he had begun in December 1937.Though we have what is probably a draft of the lecture, we do nothave a copy of the lecture itself, only commentaries on it in two newspaper reports that are given here. In the chaos of the war beginning it neversaw print. However in 1943, Tolkien was invited to contribute to a festschrift for Charles Williams, and began revising and enlarging the lectureon fairy tales for this. Possibly he felt this piece was most appropriate forWilliams, who, like himself, wrote in the fantasy mode; and perhaps theChristian character of Williams’s work also made Tolkien begin stressing the potentially Christian happy ending of fairy tale. Tolkien’s workon the essay exists in manuscript in the Bodleian, and Verlyn Fliegerand Douglas Anderson have here done admirable work in transcribing itthrough all its vagaries. XXXXXXXX collection, Essays Presented to Charles Williams,was not published until 1947, by which time Williams’s death in 1945had turned it from festschrift to memorial.For the next years Tolkien was continually absorbed in XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings, but in 1955, with the completion and early success of that work, hecomplained that the essay was long out of print. However it was not till1959 that his publishers Allen and Unwin agreed to a contract for it, andthen only if he included an illustrative fairy-story to pad out what otherwise would have been too thin a volume. Tolkien made a few revisions tothe essay as it had appeared in the Williams volume, but it was a further242Book Reviewsfive years until the essay actually appeared in Tree and Leaf.Tolkien On Fairy-stories gives us a very full picture of the changing content of Tolkien’s essay, which was revised during the composition of XXXXXXXXLord of the Rings. Flieger and Anderson first reprint the final version of1964 in its entirety, adding their own notes and commentary. XXXXXXXXn theysummarise the entire manuscript and publication history behind this final version, noting and commenting on all the changes made by Tolkien.This summary is followed by two contemporary newspaper reviews ofthe original Lang lecture, one of these taken from the other: but themain one, from the St Andrews Citizen, and evidently using shorthand,summarises the content of the lecture in great detail. XXXXXXXX remainder ofthe book transcribes two manuscripts, called “A” and “B,” the one purportedly a draft of the Lang lecture, and the other both a second draftof the lecture and a series of interpolated observations and notes Tolkienmade over the years prior to the Williams collection. XXXXXXXXse manuscriptsare annotated.Astonishingly, these two manuscripts, from the Bodleian Library inOxford, have never previously been published. “A,” which is numberedconsecutively, only starts at page 5, and ends at page 28 in the midst ofdiscussing “escape” in fairy stories. XXXXXXXX editors believe that these missingpages were recycled in Manuscript “B,” “whose introductory pages overlap closely the presumed but missing beginning of A, and which picks upand continues from where A breaks off ” (173). In other words Tolkiensimply lifted these pages from his first draft to use in his second.XXXXXXXX editors conclude with a bibliography of the works consulted inpreparing their edition, and with another listing the works Tolkien reador cited in preparing the essay “On Fairy-stories” itself. XXXXXXXX only deficiency here is the absence of a list of works written to comment on orexplicate the essay, particularly in relation to XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, forwhich it was the ground plan.In appearance this volume is very attractive, with its jacket front anapposite painting by Tolkien himself, “XXXXXXXX Shores of Faery” (1915). Thispainting is of two bent and poisoned trees framing a semi-circular image of Valinor. It is shot through with long golden and white spears oflight cast by the final moon- and sun-fruits of the dying trees; and this isso reminiscent of Blake, that one begins to wonder how much Tolkienmay have owed to him in other respects. XXXXXXXX book itself is a stout blackhardback which is easy to open out and does not crack, printed on thickpaper with very readable type. Unfortunately, however, all the page references for the annotations to A and B are wrong by two and three pagesrespectively (these are corrected in the second printing).As for the ordering of the material in the book, with the final 1964version of the essay coming before all the preceding versions, I do not243Book Reviewsmyself feel very comfortable with this. Since the book is showing thechanges to “On Fairy-stories” over the years, it would seem natural toplace the final form last. Again, it might seem more appropriate to placeManuscript A, if it is being seen as a draft of the lecture, before the newspaper reports of the lecture itself. And if one can identify the pages from1 to 4 and from 28 to the end that have simply been lifted from Manuscript A and slotted into Manuscript B, might it not have been better toreplace them in A while noting their re-use in B? I can see the wish toplace published material all in one place, and manuscripts in another, butI cannot find any other reason for the arrangement as it stands. Certainlyit caused me some confusion in mentally leaping back and forth.What then does this assemblage show us? XXXXXXXX very detailed recordof Tolkien’s original Lang Lecture in the St Andrews Citizen shows that itscentral point was that the fairy-story was not about fairies but “Faërie.”This led to a dismissal of various forms hitherto seen as fairy-stories, suchas beast-fables. In this Tolkien’s lecture was initially directed at the moreinclusive views of Andrew Lang and other nineteenth-century scholarsof fairy-stories, in contact with which he began to form his own ideas.XXXXXXXX lecture in that sense seems to have been introspective in character,Tolkien feeling his way.After Tolkien had stated his idea of fairy-story in contrast to thesefigures, he seems to have spent a good part of the time left on the natureof escape in fairy-story. Here he was beginning to look more towards hisown work, and to providing it with a philosophic underpinning. As partof this, that the association of fairy-stories with children was a historicalaccident, and that the outlook of fairy tales has no essential link withchildhood. While allowing that “Escape” was an essential characteristicof fairy tale, he denied that this was any failure of maturity, and usedthe comparison of the prisoner’s natural wish to escape confinement tojustify a flight from modern “reality” and mechanised culture. (After thisTolkien engaged at length in a discussion of Victorian clothing that became a digression. XXXXXXXXse remarks were to be so truncated by the time ofthe 1964 publication of the essay as to be well-nigh incomprehensible:Tolkien had here let a hobby-horse run away with him.)XXXXXXXX Lang lecture is marking out the ground of the fairy-tale as Tolkien saw it, and building its perimeter fence. We find Tolkien saying muchmore what the fairy tale is not than what it is. On “escape,” for instance,he tells us that the fairy tale gives us release from modernity, industrialism, poor taste in clothes, hunger, pain, poverty, injustice and death: thatis, he says much more about what the escape is from than about what it istowards. He is not yet moving outwards, into his own territory.As well as “escape,” it seems clear that Tolkien did in the lecture touchon what he later called “Recovery” as one of the criteria of fairy-story,244Book Reviewsbut the Citizen reporter seems rather to have garbled what he said. However, since it is mentioned under the sub-heading “Origin of Fairy Stories,” it appears that Tolkien made this process of “renewal and return”analogous to returning to the beginnings of fairy-stories themselves. Thisis perhaps another way of saying that the fairy story should be of a traditional rather than a radically novel character. Moreover, Tolkien is not somuch talking about the reader doing this self-renewing as the fairy-storyitself. This makes the point about “recovery” more a literary drinking atthe springs of Helicon than a moral benefit to its audience. Here againit would seem that the lecture was inward looking and literary-scholarlyin character.XXXXXXXX sense of enclosure seems continued in what Tolkien ends by saying about the “happy ending” of fairy story. He sees it as a mere literarydevice, a frame to a picture, “no more to be the real end of the story thanthe picture-frame was of the visionary scene or the window-casement ofthe outer world” (169). It is only in his later thinking that Tolkien sees thehappy ending as an essential part of fairy story, no mere literary devicebut an image of Truth itself. It would seem that in the lecture Tolkienportrayed fairy-stories as diversions from reality rather than as giving usa new and truer Reality.XXXXXXXX content of the lecture seems reflected in its somewhat apologetictone, whereby Tolkien starts by saying he is not a student of fairy storiesas Andrew Lang was, proceeds by declaring it is sometimes “dangerousfor him to ask too many questions [as a traveller in the land of fairystory]” (165), and goes on to say he is at as disadvantage in not being aScotsman. This tone is more fully seen, as the editors of Tolkien On Fairystories remark, in the opening folios of Manuscript B, which are probablythe draft pages for the opening of the lecture taken from Manuscript A(206ff).From the report we have, it would seem that Tolkien’s lecture contained little reference to the association of children and fairy tales towhich he devoted much attention in the draft. Neither lecture nor draftmention the categories Fantasy, Imagination and Enchantment as Tolkien was later to do, nor do they make any reference to Consolation, whichafter Fantasy, Recovery and Escape was to be Tolkien’s fourth main criterion for a successful fairy-story. In particular the lecture does not touchon that aspect of Consolation that Tolkien was later to endow with potential Christian power. Of course, part of this is down to the fact thatTolkien is giving a lecture, which is usually no more than 7,000 words,and things in his draft had to go. But it is also a question of what becamerelevant. He was talking and arguing with Lang and other scholars, andattacking the “realism” that rejects fairy-stories as escapist. Later he wasto become less an apologist for the genre and a more assured advocate245Book Reviewsof it. This was partly because from now on he wrote rather than had tolecture on it; but also because his writing of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings gave himincreasing confidence in the truth of what he had said and in the literaryworth of fairy-stories themselves.However, the lecture and its draft show how seriously Tolkien tookfairy-tales as literature. He is the first in British literature since GeorgeMacDonald to do so, and the most prominent since the German Romantic writers and theorists of the Kunstmärchen (c.1790-1820). In doingthis he turns three assumptions on their heads, namely, that fairy talesare about fairies, that they are for children and that the escapism at theircore is contemptible. In this one lecture we already have no mere scholararguing a dusty corner, but a major mind contributing new insights. Andthose insights are going to guide what he writes afterwards.Turning now to Manuscript B, we find the growth of the Tolkien’slater ideas on fairy-story, which reached broadly final form by the end ofthe war. It is here that he develops his ideas of Fantasy, Recovery, Escape,Consolation and Evangelium, and here that he has much more to sayabout the craft of making. Where the lecture and Manuscript A talk ofisolating the fairy-story as a genre, or of how its nature is changed bycontinual additions over centuries, or of whether escapism in literatureis a good or bad thing, now we talk much more about the individualhuman maker, struggling to make his materials come together into anenchanted whole. While keeping all the theoretic material of the lecture,Tolkien now becomes a little more practical. How do you make a fairystory? What sort of a story will it be? How will it affect people? What wasrelatively introverted in the essay now works outwards, through Tolkiento his audience.And this is because, across the whole period of Manuscript B, Tolkien is struggling his way through the writing of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings. Heonce wrote to me, “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings was a deliberate attempt to writea large-scale adult fairy-story” (letter dated 8 February 1967). This maywell have grown to be the case, but it can hardly have been so from theoutset, when he had not yet formulated his criteria for a successful fairytale. But it is striking that he says that his fantasy was written to expresshis theories: it suggests a degree of deliberateness in every choice thatgoes far beyond mapping, dating or language-construction in imposingcoherence on the story. However, we should not take every statementTolkien makes absolutely at face value. After all, he once said that like hisother stories XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings was written simply to provide a contextfor its invented languages (Letters 219).We must not, I think, consider Manuscript B as the final stage ofTolkien’s thinking for the essay. Much that we find in Manuscript A isrepeated, and topics treated there are dragged forth once more to be246Book Reviewsgnawed over. If Tolkien called the fairy tale a soup of bits and piecespicked up over the ages, bits and pieces is still what his essay remains inManuscript B: his own soup is still very far from the table. Sometimes thethinking and the writing run clear, and we get passages that we shall seeagain in the final version. But most of the material discusses once morethe topics of fairy-story origins and of children as their readers.On fairy-story origins Tolkien is driven by his linguistic instinct forsource hunting. Despite his assertions that the importance of fairy-stories is in what they are now, and that he will only “lightly touch” onthe theme of origins, page after page canvasses the various mutationsof fairy-tales down the ages, their relation to myth, and whether theirorigins are through independent creations of the same basic narrativesor transmission from a culture center.On children Tolkien continually ties himself in knots with generalizations (for instance, that if children were uniquely suited to readingfairy tales they would write only stories of that sort) or arguments basedmerely on his own individual experience as a child. But of course, heis often scribbling down stray thoughts, and we must not give them thescrutiny we would apply to a settled essay. What is obvious is continuedobsession with this subject, and the reason is not far to seek. He is embarked on a fantasy for adults more than children, and he is not sure thathe will find a market.When we consider all the material here, it is plain that the essay“On Fairy-stories” came at no time to Tolkien as a unified literary programme. Each of the subjects—definition, origins, children, recovery, escape, loathing for modern civilization, is treated in isolation from the others. XXXXXXXXre is never any sense of any stream of thought running througheverything, nor does Tolkien make much attempt to join one area ofhis thinking with another, so that the “origins” material is in a separatebox from that on “recovery” or “escape”. XXXXXXXXre is nothing necessarilywrong with that—it is justifiable to proceed by an additive or “spectrum”method of description: but what is worrying here is Tolkien’s ability tocontradict himself, and his habit of digressing from the point. Moreoverthe way he continually returns to worry a subject suggests that even inprint we will not have his settled views.It must be said that, so far does Manuscript B seem from an essay, itis almost a miracle that Tolkien managed to bring everything togetherfor the Williams collection. He had of course the organisation forced onhim by the 1939 lecture, and to that he must have returned for his broadoutline. Into this outline he injected the quite new matter on dreams anddrama, on children and fairy-story, on “Elvish” and human fantasy, onthe nature of Fantasy, Imagination, Enchantment and Secondary Belief, and, most of all, and at considerable length, on four criteria of the247Book Reviewssuccessful fairy-story—Fantasy, Recovery, Escape and Consolation. Allthis would seem further to confuse the situation.Instead, by some miracle or touch of the wand, it makes all the random lines turn straight. Tolkien’s idea of Fantasy as “the realisation,independent of the conceiving mind, of imagined wonder” leads inquite clear sequence to the notion of re-enchanting our perception ofthe world through Recovery of a sense of the elemental “this-ness” ofthings. From thence the idea of Escape from our industrial environmentto a primal unappropriated world was quite natural. Finally, Tolkien’sfourth category of fairy-story, Consolation, concerning the various joysthat are offered through the “happy ending,” also follows clearly from thetopic of Escape.XXXXXXXXn we see that in fact all of Tolkien’s four new criteria, Fantasy,Recovery, Escape and Consolation involve a return to beginnings, a stripping away of our blinkering experience. And that brings us back to thematerial on the origins of the fairy-story, which now acquires a late andunconscious relevance: to understand what the fairy story is you must gobackwards, and to understand what it does you must go backwards inperception.Now this leads us to the topic of children: while Tolkien denies thatthey are fairy-stories’ true readership, he argues that all readers shouldbe child-like—that is aesthetically innocent, entirely open to them. Andthus, by indirections direction is found out: the essay, composed of aseries of aperçus, begins at as primal a level as that by which fairy-stories themselves operate, to come together like disjoined limbs comingtogether to make a living body. It is the “realization, independent of theconceiving mind, of imagined wonder” (35). To say the least it is remarkable, “a sudden and miraculous grace: never to be counted on to recur”(75).For the more general character of Tolkien’s views on the fairy tale,however, it must be striking to any open-minded reader how much he isarguing with Victorian rather than modern scholars of the genre, as ifnothing significant had been written about the fairy tale since the 1890s.Not one word does he write about Sigmund Freud, who saw fairy talesas emerging, like dreams, from the tangled undergrowth of the libido,and whose views had transformed twentieth-century thought. Tolkienthought that sex was something you really did not talk about, whereFreud believed that, directly or indirectly, you talked about nothing else.For Freud as for Tolkien, fantasy was the true idiom of literature: butwhere Freud sees fantasy as the new realism, Tolkien sees it as an escapefrom reality.This reminds us of just how much Tolkien’s thinking is an islandedintellectual survival in his own time. More broadly it reminds us how248Book ReviewsEngland managed to keep Victorian and Edwardian views the sociallydominant ones for forty years after the First World War. Tolkien’s thinking passes back through fantasy writers such as E.R. Eddison, John Masefield, Kenneth Morris, Lord Dunsany and Kenneth Grahame to WilliamMorris’s late romances and the nostalgic, pastoralist Georgian poets ofhis childhood. It is there that he belongs, rather than with such writers ofhis adult years as Eliot, Lawrence, Wyndham Lewis or Auden.COLIN MANLOVEEDINBURGH, SCOTLANDWords, Phrases and Passages in Various Tongues in “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,” byJ.R.R. Tolkien, edited by Christopher Gilson. Mountain View, CA: Parma Eldalamberon, 2007. 220 pp. $35.00 (oversize paperback) [no ISBN].Parma Edalamberon XVII.Any reader of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings who has jotted down lists of Elvish vocabulary and puzzled endlessly over the significance of unglossedwords and names such as Rhudaur, edraith and Tol Brandir will have dreamedof a book in which all the words are laid out, all the riddles are answeredand—this being Tolkien—new vistas are opened up to delight the imagination. As a child of ten or twelve, I literally dreamed of stumbling acrosssuch a volume in a bookshop, of opening its pages, and of glimpsingthose new vistas. Of course, as is the way with elfinesse, when I woke upall the details were forgotten. But here at last, reassuringly solid, is thatbook—a linguistic companion to XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings that should satisfyfor quite some time those who love Sindarin and Quenya.Yet the book is certainly not as I dreamed: Tolkien envisaged it butnever finished it, and his shifting ideas on almost every detail produce apalimpsest, a tangle of variants and downright contradictions. XXXXXXXXre isnot one text but many, yet they involve multiple passes through the samematerial: the instances of invented language in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings. XXXXXXXXreis the impression of a mind swooping down to circle repeatedly aroundparticular points of grammar or meaning that troubled their creator,from the meaning of Galadriel to the various forms of the Quenya firstperson plural. Other points get the briefest flicker of attention, though tomany readers these, including a wealth of previously unpublished names,will be of the greatest immediate interest.In contrast with earlier issues of Parma Eldalamberon which have presented Tolkien’s work in Elvish from c. 1915 to the early 1930s, the textsincluded here cover that most familiar phase of Tolkien’s creative career,XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings as it was when complete. Thus, perhaps, most readerswill find these texts more immediately satisfying than the Qenya Lexicon248Book ReviewsEngland managed to keep Victorian and Edwardian views the sociallydominant ones for forty years after the First World War. Tolkien’s thinking passes back through fantasy writers such as E.R. Eddison, John Masefield, Kenneth Morris, Lord Dunsany and Kenneth Grahame to WilliamMorris’s late romances and the nostalgic, pastoralist Georgian poets ofhis childhood. It is there that he belongs, rather than with such writers ofhis adult years as Eliot, Lawrence, Wyndham Lewis or Auden.COLIN MANLOVEEDINBURGH, SCOTLANDWords, Phrases and Passages in Various Tongues in “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,” byJ.R.R. Tolkien, edited by Christopher Gilson. Mountain View, CA: Parma Eldalamberon, 2007. 220 pp. $35.00 (oversize paperback) [no ISBN].Parma Edalamberon XVII.Any reader of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings who has jotted down lists of Elvish vocabulary and puzzled endlessly over the significance of unglossedwords and names such as Rhudaur, edraith and Tol Brandir will have dreamedof a book in which all the words are laid out, all the riddles are answeredand—this being Tolkien—new vistas are opened up to delight the imagination. As a child of ten or twelve, I literally dreamed of stumbling acrosssuch a volume in a bookshop, of opening its pages, and of glimpsingthose new vistas. Of course, as is the way with elfinesse, when I woke upall the details were forgotten. But here at last, reassuringly solid, is thatbook—a linguistic companion to XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings that should satisfyfor quite some time those who love Sindarin and Quenya.Yet the book is certainly not as I dreamed: Tolkien envisaged it butnever finished it, and his shifting ideas on almost every detail produce apalimpsest, a tangle of variants and downright contradictions. XXXXXXXXre isnot one text but many, yet they involve multiple passes through the samematerial: the instances of invented language in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings. XXXXXXXXreis the impression of a mind swooping down to circle repeatedly aroundparticular points of grammar or meaning that troubled their creator,from the meaning of Galadriel to the various forms of the Quenya firstperson plural. Other points get the briefest flicker of attention, though tomany readers these, including a wealth of previously unpublished names,will be of the greatest immediate interest.In contrast with earlier issues of Parma Eldalamberon which have presented Tolkien’s work in Elvish from c. 1915 to the early 1930s, the textsincluded here cover that most familiar phase of Tolkien’s creative career,XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings as it was when complete. Thus, perhaps, most readerswill find these texts more immediately satisfying than the Qenya Lexicon249Book Reviewswhich Tolkien compiled as an undergraduate and soldier in the FirstWorld War, or the grammars of Noldorin he wrote in the 1920s, or even“XXXXXXXX Etymologies” published in XXXXXXXX Lost Road. XXXXXXXX territory surveyed isengagingly familiar. XXXXXXXX dusty excavation seen in editions of these earlierlinguistic papers has given way to the study of forms that are given vividlife in Tolkien’s greatest literary work.Perusing those notes is like meeting old friends again, and gettingto know them more closely than ever. Those who love only the sense ofmystery produced by an untranslated phrase in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings suchas “naur an edraith ammen” should steer well clear; yet even for thekeenest lambendil there will be new mysteries open up here: for example,Arvernien is translated as “the land beside the Verna,” but nowhere are wetold what the Verna is.It is fascinating to see Lúthien translated here as “daughter of flower,”suggesting that the proposal in 1977’s An Introduction to Elvish that LuthienTinuviel was intended to evoke “Florence Nightingale” may have beennear the mark. We are also told the Quenya name for Barad-dûr andthe Dwarvish original for Nargothrond; the river-name Narog, too, is derived from the Dwarven language Khuzdul. Among many others, Asfaloth, Nûrnen, lebethron and Orodreth are explained at last, as is the final element in the place-names Eregion and Sirion. XXXXXXXX explanation of Dol Baranproves that even the most apparently transparent Sindarin name mayhave more than meets the eye: it does not, after all, contain the elementbaran “golden-brown” seen in Baranduin. It is a surprise to learn that thefirst elements in Druadan and Rhovanion are etymologically related. XXXXXXXXregional name Rhudaur has long proved opaque; yet now it is revealed asnone other than the Sindarin for “Trollshaw,” which has always appearedright next to it on the Lord of the Rings map: the solution was staring us inthe face all along. On the other hand, since the materials presented aresometimes little more than jottings, there are frustrations: the glosses onhuorn are tantalisingly illegible.Perhaps most interesting of all for this reader is the translation ofSauron’s bynames Thû and Gorthu as “horrible darkness, black mist” and“Mist of Fear” respectively, with a related root THUS meaning “evilmist, fog, Darkness.” XXXXXXXX ideas anchor him in the primal night represented in XXXXXXXX Book of Lost Tales by Ungweliantë the spider; in the BlackBreath of his Nazgûl, the fog of the Barrow-downs, the grey mist of fearthat flows from the Paths of the Dead and brings Gimli to his terrifiedknees; and ultimately, I suspect, to Tolkien’s experience of smoke barrages, gas attacks and “animal horror” on the Somme.Much of the value of these papers lies not in strictly linguistic itemsof vocabulary, grammar, phonology or morphology, but in their broaderphilological aspects. XXXXXXXXre is, for example, an excellent summary of the250Book Reviewsinfluence of Finnish and Welsh on Quenya and Sindarin respectively;how that influence changed as Tolkien refined his languages; and howSindarin differs from Quenya as Welsh differs from Latin. XXXXXXXXre is alsomuch on the dialects of Sindarin in Beleriand, predicated on (and sometimes contributing to) Tolkien’s complex historical view of the era.Subtle are the ways of philologists, and Tolkien was certainly no exception. He coined a Quenya equivalent for Gilthoniel, then deleted it, presumably because there was no warrant for one historically (it was Varda’sname among the exiles, who spoke Sindarin not Quenya). One note liststhe linguistic indications that Galadriel’s lament, “Namarië,” is in a specifically Third-Age form of Quenya. A statement that the Sindarin vision-word fân “being elvish . . . has no implication either of uncertaintyor unreality” is best understood by reading “On Fairy-stories.”Tolkien particularly seems to hate just concocting a new root to explain a word already invented by now found to be somehow problematic,as when he coins then rejects WOR “exude” as an element in miruvor. Onthe other hand he is content to create new derivatives of existing roots,e.g. mbassē beside mbasta from MBAS (52).XXXXXXXX introduction shows that Tolkien sometimes consciously wrote orrevised his fiction as a direct “consequence of thinking about the pointsraised” by an analysis of linguistic elements. His thoughts were exercisedin particular by the inconsistencies which had inevitably arisen duringthe long and hugely complex development of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings. Workon these points led to him doing “a great deal of work” on “XXXXXXXX Silmarillion,” as he said (perhaps a little defensively) to Rayner Unwin inFebruary 1960. Any anxieties the publisher might have felt were justified,however. XXXXXXXX catalyst for this burst of work was a fan’s compilation ofwords and names in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings—the kind of letter that musthave seriously distracted Tolkien from direct composition on “XXXXXXXX Silmarillion” in his last two decades.In Tolkien’s niggling with languages the potential for distraction wasinfinite. By the time XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings was published, the grammar andmorphology of Quenya and Sindarin were sufficiently well developed(in fact had been so since his earliest lexicons of c. 1915 and c. 1917respectively) to allow alternative explanations for many words: for example, omentië is derived from either a gerund omentië “meeting” (with verbalending –ië) or a noun compound “meeting of pathways” (where the finalelement is the noun tië “path”) (13).All in all, his notes constitute a rich mine indeed, whether you areinterested in vocabulary alone, or grammar, phonology and morphology, or you want more data on Middle-earth, or wish to see how Tolkien uses philology to deepen his creation (as in the entry on fân- whichbecomes a mini-essay, 173-80; or that on sule, 124-5). XXXXXXXXre is probably251Book Reviewsmore fresh information on Sindarin in this publication than anywhereelse. Snippets from letters otherwise unpublished enrich the stew, such asthe one in which Tolkien describes how “the ‘languages’ have, of course,changed . . . hardening at last with age.” (40)—though a reconsiderationof the meaning of Noldo suggests the hardening was never actually a surething.Aragorn is given a slightly different interpretation from the one provided in XXXXXXXX Peoples of Middle-earth; the explanation of Nimrodel precedesthe version furnished in Unfinished Tales; and Gilraen is translated quitedifferently here from the gloss seen in Vinyar Tengwar 42. OccasionallyTolkien sees the existence of two possible explanations for one form as anartistic boon—a pun—rather than a problem; for example when he derives Fanuilos, Elbereth’s byname, from fanui “cloudy” and los “snow” onone hand and from fân “white” and Uilos, the Sindarin name of MountOiolossë in Valinor.For those seeking to write in Sindarin or Quenya, there are complete present tense paradigms for two verbs (“make” and “grow”) in eachlanguage, plus possessive pronoun suffixes for Quenya. But on page 57,one of these verb paradigms appears for Quenya in a different form,with many divergences. Even at this late stage, Tolkien had not settled onquestions he had started answering in the 1920s or even earlier.XXXXXXXX compilation gives the lie to the idea that Tolkien’s invented languages became immutable and orderly once XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings hadbeen completed. His delight was still in finding new or improved words,forms, derivations and grammatical patterns, so even if the forms in XXXXXXXXLord of the Rings were fixed he now found multiple ways to explain manyof them. And in some cases he was even prepared to alter those that hadalready appeared in print, having found them aesthetically inferior or insome way technically flawed.A further realization, adumbrated in XXXXXXXX History of Middle-earth butacutely clear here, is that Tolkien’s conceptions shifted both generallyand in detail while he was writing and revising XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings for itsfirst publication—an eighteen-year process almost as long as the lifespanof his two chief Elvish tongues prior to XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings. He nowfound inconsistencies everywhere, presumably because at any given timehe had either been attending more closely to the narrative than the language and nomenclature, and so had been careless; or (more likely) hehad held a view at the time of writing which he had since left behind.One thing that these notes do not tell you is what Tolkien intended whenhe first coined most of the material in the process of writing XXXXXXXX Lord ofthe Rings. His interpretations are a retrospective examination of items henow saw as exposed to public view and therefore requiring justificationor polish.252Book ReviewsTolkien’s purpose is often to reconsider the linguistic bases of elements in “XXXXXXXX Silmarillion”—the names of the sons of Finwë, thenomenclature of the Elven diaspora—to make his mythological workready for public consumption. He is often willing to contemplate majorchanges—he hates the names Fingon and Felagund and finds many otherswanting, deciding at one point to alter Glaurung to Angruin (but never carrying this through). Yet this dislike of old forms is hardly surprising: thesenames had been coined, in some cases, in the 1920s or earlier. XXXXXXXXy nolonger reflected his ideas about his invented languages, technically oraesthetically.However, there are hints of a more seismic shift, already seen in Morgoth’s Ring in relation to narrative. XXXXXXXX Book of Lost Tales had inhabited therealm of the fabulous, but now Tolkien wanted to appeal more stronglyto realism and internal consistency. Noldo was now reconsidered to mean“dark-haired” rather than “wise” because he felt the second kindredwould have been named before their cultural or spiritual tendencies hadbecome a fixed idea. This prosaic later notion was surely not an improvement on the simpler, emblematic original.A key passage from a letter quoted herein helps to underline the problem. It sets out Tolkien’s two principal purposes in inventing languages:firstly, as the best means of differentiating peoples in a story “without ‘lecturing’” by introducing massive cultural detail; and secondly, as a pleasure in themselves, separate from the story. For the first purpose, completelexicons and other data are actually an impediment, he admits—becausethey increase the degree of “lecturing” and threaten to overwhelm thestory. But for the second purpose they are highly desirable.After witnessing at length the first decade or so of Tolkien’s fiftyeight-year love affair with his “Middle-earth” languages—a period whenhe had little or no audience—we see the activity he had dubbed his “secret vice” finally exposed to the public; and we sense his overwhelmingrelief and pleasure at discovering that other people were interested, evenfascinated and delighted by these tongues. I suspect this revelation thathis vice need no longer remain a secret was a catalyst in his failure toachieve publication in any form of “XXXXXXXX Silmarillion.” Now he had evenmore excuses to focus on perfecting the languages (purpose no. 2) at theexpense of pursuing the stories which they served (purpose no. 1). Inways which his readers would recognize and deprecate even if Tolkienhimself did not, the brain was taking over from the heart.XXXXXXXX notes often consist of simple declarative statements, where Tolkien is sure of his ground and especially when dealing with Quenya. Healso frequently writes not as inventor but as student, calling the BlackSpeech “evidently an agglutinative language” with a verbal system which“must have included pronominal suffixes expressing the object, as well as253Book Reviewsthose indicating the subject” (10-11; my emphases). Yet at other timesTolkien writes openly as author, confessing his creative thinking, his dilemmas and doubts, and even his disappointments with his own work.We see Tolkien’s sense of phonaesthetics determining the choice offorms—there can be no other explanation for his rejection of the rootDEL “thick, dense” as a component of the name Glorfindel because “itdoes not provide suitable Quenya or Sindarin forms.” One may or maynot agree that the ephemeral forms delch “dense,” delw “thick,” or Quenya counterparts lelya, nelta, delta, delya are not “suitable”; it is a matter oftaste—one may guess that Tolkien would have preferred the root vowelto be pronounced further back in the mouth (o, u) rather than at the frontlike e to indicate the sense of denseness. And indeed, in the root indexwe see lelya as a Quenya word for “lovely, beautiful” under root DEL or“fine, beautiful” under root DĔL (151).XXXXXXXX reason why Tolkien revised omentielmo > omentielvo in the secondedition is revealed—that the m here and in met in Galadriel’s lament mustderive from the same origin, yet the former is inclusive (“our,” i.e. “yoursand mine”) while the latter (“us two,” i.e “me and a third party, but notyou”) is exclusive. Tolkien worked with typical industry and ingenuity toresolve this, but his solutions created further disturbances in the widergrammatical system—so he then decided that Frodo had simply madea mistake. Thus pedantry defeats romance. Tolkien was frustrated withhimself, dismissing his efforts as “all this to-do” (130). Yet the secondedition allowed him freedom to smooth over the cracks, altering Frodo’sword to omentielvo, along with introducing other changes to meet his highly self-critical standards. Illuminating these processes, a deft introductionby editor Christopher Gilson makes good use of the just-published J.R.R.Tolkien: A Companion and Guide.XXXXXXXX backbone of Parma Eldalamberon 17 is Tolkien’s commentary,“Words, Phrases and Passages,” abandoned when he reached Lórien.But Gilson has also taken the opportunity to publish numerous linguisticlists, notes, letter and mini-essays, all (very) roughly contemporary. Coverage of the songs “A Elbereth Gilthoniel” and “Namárie” means thatthere is significant overlap with Tolkien’s linguistic appendix to DonaldSwann’s XXXXXXXX Road Goes Ever On (1967); and there is also a great deal ofmaterial already seen in alternative versions in his guide for translatorsas published in Jared Lobdell’s A Tolkien Compass (1975) and Wayne G.Hammond and Christina Scull’s XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings: A Reader’s Companion(2005)—especially as drafts of these are included, discussing Dutch andSwedish translations of Isengard and Isenmouthe (32-33).From multiple options for presentation, Gilson has chosen one thatis more practical than purist. Rather than presenting each note or textor sheaf as a separate whole (arranged, for example, chronologically),254Book Reviewshe has organised all these items into two large sections. Firstly, there is acomprehensive word-list such as Tolkien had planned—a single analytical commentary that is notionally a fuller form of “Words, Phrases andPassages.” Secondly, various etymological notes under root-headings arepresented as an appendix, into which, usefully, the editors interpolate alist of all roots mentioned elsewhere in these texts, to form an index. Thismeans Parma Eldalamberon 17 functions as a linguistic companion to XXXXXXXXLord of the Rings (complementing XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings: A Reader’s Companion)and as a “sequel” to “XXXXXXXX Etymologies” of the late 1930s. Additionally,Gilson provides an index of glosses, organised by language.XXXXXXXX sheer volume of information here precludes the kind of wideranging editorial cross-references and analysis seen in previous issue ofParma Eldalamberon and its sister publication Vinyar Tengwar. Full commentary and references would have swelled this volume to at least three timesits length, as may be seen by comparing the treatment of a list of Elvishwords for modes of thought here with the much more discursive analysisof the same fragment in Vinyar Tengwar 41; or the terse presentation ofnotes on Lhûn and -ló (Ringló, Gwathló) here with the full discussion seenin Vinyar Tengwar 48, “XXXXXXXX Problem of Lhûn.” XXXXXXXX disquisition on wordsfor “and,” as well as Tolkien’s lengthy notes on comparatives, would certainly have benefited from Vinyar Tengwar-style commentary. Doubtlesssome notes will indeed receive more comment and analysis in later issuesof Parma Eldalamberon or Vinyar Tengwar when relevant to new material.But within this publication the apparatus is mostly functional, restricted to major cross-references and bibliographical description. WhereTolkien fails to translate a word, the editor usually leaves it unglossed.Where Tolkien revisits a concept and revises his ideas, there is little orno discussion of the changes he makes. Though all dating informationis provided, there is no real attempt to put entries in chronological sequence to show the development of his thought. It all demands a greatdeal of the reader. But on the other hand it provides much scope forinquiry and analysis by those who wish to work on Elvish: what doeseach untranslated word mean; what does this or that form indicate aboutgrammar or phonology?XXXXXXXX cross-references and indexes are rendered less useful due to thereference system used: not by page within this issue, but by page references to XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, which stand at the head of each entry or series of entries. XXXXXXXXse page references are small, indented, and spaced asif they belong to the entries preceding, not those following. Though someentries span many pages, there are no headwords to help readers findtheir place. XXXXXXXXre is no index of unglossed forms, and none by gloss. Afew apparent typographical errors appear, and readers would be advisedto check the errata published periodically online at <www.elvish.org>.255Book ReviewsNone of this should detract from the considerable achievement ofbringing such intractable materials to light. And these notes will no doubtincrease in value, and become easier to understand, when Parma Eldalamberon’s chronological coverage of Tolkien’s language invention reaches tothe 1950s and 1960s—though to judge by the volume and complexity ofthe material published so far, that must still be a long way off.JOHN GARTHLONDON, ENGLANDArda Reconstructed: XXXXXXXX Creation of the Published “Silmarillion,” by DouglasCharles Kane. Bethlehem, Pennsylvania: Lehigh University Press, 2009.280 pp. $65.00. ISBN 9780980149630.Douglas Charles Kane’s diligently researched book takes the readerthrough the process behind an earlier diligent effort, that of ChristopherTolkien (assisted by Guy Gavriel Kay) in editing the 1977 Silmarillion.Kane minutely details the delicate task Christopher undertook in stitching together elements of his father’s oeuvre, disparate in genre (fromannals and glossaries to full-fledged narratives) and in composition-date(from the 1930s to the 1960s, including work composed both before andafter XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings).Kane goes through all of XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, beginning with the “Ainulindalë” and proceeding on until the end of the “Quenta Silmarillion,”with the final defeat of Morgoth by Eonwë (the “Akallabêth” and, especially, “Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age,” are less extensivelytreated, as Kane deems there to be fewer textual questions). In each chapter, Kane details exactly what sources Christopher used and the truly astonishing inventiveness he showed in assembling them into a steady narrative. He also supplies extensive charts and tables detailing the editorialprocess in a blow-by-blow way. This graphic element lends clarity andorganization to what might otherwise be an overwhelming amount ofdetail. Finally, the potential dryness is relieved by absorbing illustrationssupplied by Anushka Mouriño; these, more realistic in terms of humanportraiture than most Tolkien-inspired art, subtly fortify Kane’s tacit argument that the “Silmarillion” material has more moments of grippinginterpersonal drama than the published version revealed. Mouriño’s depiction of the spirit of Míriel appearing before Mandos and Manwë hasa Pre-Raphaelite lushness, and also embodies Kane’s point that Christopher’s recension excessively cropped back Míriel’s role.One of the questions Kane’s study puts to rest totally is the old conjecture about whether XXXXXXXX Silmarillion is all Tolkien’s work. Other than avery few instances (such as tying the Nauglamir more closely to Thingol255Book ReviewsNone of this should detract from the considerable achievement ofbringing such intractable materials to light. And these notes will no doubtincrease in value, and become easier to understand, when Parma Eldalamberon’s chronological coverage of Tolkien’s language invention reaches tothe 1950s and 1960s—though to judge by the volume and complexity ofthe material published so far, that must still be a long way off.JOHN GARTHLONDON, ENGLANDArda Reconstructed: XXXXXXXX Creation of the Published “Silmarillion,” by DouglasCharles Kane. Bethlehem, Pennsylvania: Lehigh University Press, 2009.280 pp. $65.00. ISBN 9780980149630.Douglas Charles Kane’s diligently researched book takes the readerthrough the process behind an earlier diligent effort, that of ChristopherTolkien (assisted by Guy Gavriel Kay) in editing the 1977 Silmarillion.Kane minutely details the delicate task Christopher undertook in stitching together elements of his father’s oeuvre, disparate in genre (fromannals and glossaries to full-fledged narratives) and in composition-date(from the 1930s to the 1960s, including work composed both before andafter XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings).Kane goes through all of XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, beginning with the “Ainulindalë” and proceeding on until the end of the “Quenta Silmarillion,”with the final defeat of Morgoth by Eonwë (the “Akallabêth” and, especially, “Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age,” are less extensivelytreated, as Kane deems there to be fewer textual questions). In each chapter, Kane details exactly what sources Christopher used and the truly astonishing inventiveness he showed in assembling them into a steady narrative. He also supplies extensive charts and tables detailing the editorialprocess in a blow-by-blow way. This graphic element lends clarity andorganization to what might otherwise be an overwhelming amount ofdetail. Finally, the potential dryness is relieved by absorbing illustrationssupplied by Anushka Mouriño; these, more realistic in terms of humanportraiture than most Tolkien-inspired art, subtly fortify Kane’s tacit argument that the “Silmarillion” material has more moments of grippinginterpersonal drama than the published version revealed. Mouriño’s depiction of the spirit of Míriel appearing before Mandos and Manwë hasa Pre-Raphaelite lushness, and also embodies Kane’s point that Christopher’s recension excessively cropped back Míriel’s role.One of the questions Kane’s study puts to rest totally is the old conjecture about whether XXXXXXXX Silmarillion is all Tolkien’s work. Other than avery few instances (such as tying the Nauglamir more closely to Thingol256Book Reviewsin “XXXXXXXX Ruin of Doriath”) no significant line in the book was “writtenby the editor” (24). Kane’s well-known online epithet, “Voronwë,” isvery suitable for his execution of this task, as watchful and respectful asMardil the Good Steward’s rule no doubt was in the wake of the disappearance of King Eärnur. Kane’s textual scholarship is rigorous and isa model not only for Tolkien scholars but for scholars of more canonical authors, whose textual study is often pursued with less enthusiasm.Where Kane’s treatment is less complete is in his own evaluation of themerits of Christopher’s editing and editorial choices. Kane makes somevery good points, and convinces the reader there was good material inthe sources available to Christopher that he did not sufficiently deploy.Although acknowledging that XXXXXXXX Silmarillion choices were motivated by“the most coherent and literary text possible” (26), Kane often gives shortshrift to the ways in which these choices were motivated by purposefulliterary intent.In assessing the “Valaquenta,” for instance, Kane notes (40) thatChristopher Tolkien changed “With Manwë now dwells Varda” to “WithManwë dwells Varda.” XXXXXXXX deletion of the “now,” though, is understood when one realizes the genre to which the “Valaquenta” belongs,a mythography of a tradition long passed on but now very remote. XXXXXXXXfinal redactors (within the Middle-earth framework) of the “Silmarillion”material would have a sense of the existence of the Valar, but not somuch their current existence in the same temporal moment; what wehave now seems somewhat like an account of the Olympian gods by awriter such as Hesiod who believed in them but had no firsthand experience of their might, and such a tone is appropriate for the distance of the“Valaquenta” from its material (one assumes its ultimate source is fromlore passed on through the returning Noldor in Beleriand).Many of Christopher Tolkien’s choices can be explained thus, in literary terms. Kane wonders why the Ents are spliced into the Aulë andYavanna chapter, and he notes that it is most likely to give “some explanation of the Ents” (55). But Kane does not mention the overall contextof both editor and author himself needing to suture a First Age narrative, not originally designed with XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings in mind, into beinga background work to a novel set in the Third Age that is effectively itssequel. Much of the “Silmarillion” was fixed in print by XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings in ways that could not be altered. “Inglor” Felagund could be handily changed to “Finrod” in the 1966 revision of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings. But,though Tolkien, according to Kane, considered making Galadriel Finrod’s daughter, this revision would have given her a degree of closenessto the Beren-Lúthien story that is neither implied or evinced in XXXXXXXX Lordof the Rings, and perhaps for this reason it was not made. Furthermore,roughly the first half of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings was composed with only a257Book Reviewsvague sense of its relation to the First Age mythos; only later on did thehistorical world of Frodo and company become identifiable as a laterphase of that of the First Age Eldar. For instance, it is clear that whenmention is first made of Gil-galad, Tolkien was looking for the generalresonance of a past Elven-king, not assigning him an assured place in aNoldorin genealogy in which he had not been mentioned before—because Tolkien had not yet invented him. XXXXXXXX question that Merry asksof Aragorn, “Who is Gil-galad?” (FR, I, xi, 197) was no doubt one, ona meta-level, Tolkien was asking himself! As Kane shows, Tolkien neverquite answered it. Aragorn’s turn to the story of Beren and Lúthien wasthus not just to a tale that avoided Mordor but to a tale, unlike that ofGil-galad, whose full scope the author composing the text already knew.Gil-galad’s ancestry is never made determinate. Even as late as the “Taleof Aldarion and Erendis,” when Gil-galad identifies himself in his correspondence with Meneldur of Númenor as “Ereinion Gil-galad, son ofFingon,” neither Gil-galad’s paternity nor his proper name are decisivelyfirm. XXXXXXXX “final” product in Unfinished Tales is solely an outcome of ajudgment made by Christopher Tolkien.XXXXXXXX overall thread here, which Kane understands but about whichhe could be much more articulate, is that Tolkien and later ChristopherTolkien were revising and re-presenting the “Silmarillion” to an audienceused to XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, that liked XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, and one whichwanted XXXXXXXX Silmarillion to fit conveniently into the world of XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings. In the initial years after the quest of the Ring was introduced tothe reading public, Tolkien was tempted to make “fundamental changes”(122) to the “Silmarillion.” For instance, he considered eliminating whatKane rightly sees as a winning feature of the earlier mythos: the Sunand Moon as later, contingent creations from the fruit of the slain Trees,rather than being astronomically primary. Tolkien himself, then laterChristopher, wisely retrenched from this wholesale re-conception. But inmany less obvious ways—due to the need to insert such later-conceivedcharacters as Galadriel, Gil-galad, and Gandalf back into primeval history—the earlier material not only had to be made generally unified andcomprehensible but this had to be done in such a way that would reassure XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings readers looking for particular characters, andalso in a general sense keep Middle-earth congruent with the knowledgethey already had of it.We now have had thirty years to absorb XXXXXXXX Silmarillion. To us Maglor and Orodreth may be as familiar as a pint of good ale at XXXXXXXX GreenDragon. But this was not the case for the 1977 readers, and ChristopherTolkien was laboring to produce a text that would satisfy the simultaneous desires of those readers for something new from Tolkien as well asfor something anchored in the Tolkien they already knew. On the other258Book Reviewsside, doubling or repetition had to be avoided. Kane notes an instancewhere a description of Nerdanel’s voice as “deeper than woman’s wont”is deleted because the same was said in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings of Galadriel’sspeech-tones (FR, II, vii, 370). Kane also notes (91) the deletion of thecharacterization by Fëanor of Melkor as “gangrel,” and I would addhere that this deletion most likely occurred because Frodo describes Gollum as a “wretched gangrel creature” (TT, IV, iv, 266). Gollum and Morgoth were similarly evil, but on vastly different scales and depths, and thedoubling of the word would have been unadvisable. Other changes, onthe part of both Tolkien and his son, seem prompted by external considerations. XXXXXXXX elimination of the children of the Valar (which madeFionwë, the son of Manwë, become Eonwë, the herald of Manwë, andwhich accounted for the famously foreshortened ending of the First Age)surely has to do with not wanting to rival Christian ideas of the incarnation of the Son of God. Similarly, the shift Kane chronicles in the location of Hildórien probably has to do with Tolkien not wanting the landof man’s origin equated with a discernible point on our own Eurasianland mass. Underlying all this suturing, shifting, and substitution was aneed to make XXXXXXXX Silmarillion readable and as tightly knit a unit as thetruly heterogeneous nature of the material could yield.Though a broader compositional perspective is thus only lurking inKane’s analysis, at times he makes his own views explicit. Kane noticesthat revisions in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion consistently “lessened the female presence” (83) in the stories, especially lamentable given the common complaint that Tolkien generally under-represented women. This is particularly true, argues Kane, of the women in Fëanor’s life: both his mother,Míriel, and his wife, Nerdanel, have unconventional and tragic life storieswhich get short shrift in the 1977 version as compared to what could havebeen pieced together with the resources at hand. Kane is on to somethinghere, and this cannot be explained away by merely compositional rationales. Yet XXXXXXXX Silmarillion already has far more to do with gender relationsthan XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings; even the happier of the two full-fledged greattales, that of Beren and Lúthien, is full of untold suffering amid the gloryof a great love. XXXXXXXX material Tolkien added latest to the “Silmarillion”cycle, such as the story of Maeglin, his ill-starred mother, Aredhel ArFeiniel, and her marriage “beneath herself ” to a Dark Elf, is one of aseries of Tolkien’s late tales about the complicated relationships betweenmen and women (for example, Aldarion and Erendis, even Celeborn andGaladriel). It adds tremendously to the emotional depth and moral realism of XXXXXXXX Silmarillion. Kane’s suggestions that expanded roles for theFëanorian ladies would have amplified this strength are well argued.As welcome as the scrupulous registering of minute changes is, thebook excels most when it points to these larger choices. XXXXXXXX discussion259Book Reviewsof Fëanor’s career is especially revelatory; we learn that it is originallynot Maedhros but his father Fëanor, who reports on the death of Finwë.This leads to the provocative conclusion that in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion the sonsof Fëanor, especially the two eldest, are tragic antiheroes as much as theirfather is. Indeed, in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion we see little of Fëanor, despite the extravagant praise Gandalf gives Feanor’s art (TT, III, xi, 204), leaving the1977 reader who knew only XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings but not yet the History ofMiddle-earth material somewhat caught short. Similarly, compositionalissues—especially Tolkien never having completed his retelling of the fallof Gondolin, the beginning of which appears in Unfinished Tales—led toGondolin not being nearly as vividly rendered in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion as theless fabled Nargothrond. Kane points this out, as well as the foreshortening of the story of Eärendil, surely one of the pivotal moments in the history of Middle-earth, but given only one or two degrees more space thanthe abbreviated defeat of Morgoth by Eonwë. As reiterated by KristineLarsen in her important talk, “Sea Birds and Morning Stars: Ceyx, Alcyone, and the Many Metamorphoses of Eärendil and Elwing” (deliveredat the 2008 Mythopoeic Society conference in Connecticut), the story ofEärendil is a moving and bittersweet tale whose power, in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion,is seen only in flashes—certainly, the Mariner’s arrival in the UndyingLands is one—of its conceivable power and scope. XXXXXXXX under-representation of both Gondolin and Eärendil means that the Beren narrative is,along with the more sorrowful tale of the Children of Húrin, the centerpiece of the “Quenta Silmarillion” in a way it otherwise would not havebeen. Perhaps in a sense Tolkien would not have been displeased, givenhow important this story was to him personally.Many of Kane’s criticisms fall into the genre of Monday-morningquarterbacking; the reason he is able to make them is because we havereams of posthumously-published Tolkien material, and the reason wehave these reams is that XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, as edited by Christopher Tolkien, was commercially successful enough to spur publication of all therest. Pertinent here is the well-known T. S. Eliot quote, “Some one said:‘XXXXXXXX dead writers are remote from us because we know so much morethan they did.’ Precisely, and they are that which we know.” We knowmore than Christopher Tolkien did when he compiled XXXXXXXX Silmarillionbecause he compiled XXXXXXXX Silmarillion in the way he did, and the book soldenough copies for the publisher to present the later, more archival material in XXXXXXXX History of Middle-earth. XXXXXXXX Silmarillion had to pilot Tolkienthrough the beginning of his nachleben, and indeed it partially guaranteed that there was one at all. Though I share Kane’s high valuationof “Athrabeth Finrod ah Andreth”—a lyrical, philosophical meditationthat embodies Tolkien’s depth and craftsmanship at their finest—one cansee how the inclusion of this, as well as the speculation concerning the260Book Reviewssecond prophecy of Mandos and Morgoth’s final defeat at the end-time,would have imbalanced the tableau. XXXXXXXX Silmarillion was published in1977 in a way that plausibly could have been Bilbo Baggins’s translationsfrom the Elvish, for readers who would be as attuned to hobbit expectations of the Elder Days as was Bilbo himself. Kane points to this when,in his otherwise sketchy discussion of the “Akallabêth,” he demonstratesthat Christopher Tolkien took out those aspects of the tale which depended on it being told by Pengoloð, the external narrative focalizer inthe “Silmarillion”-era tales before the Baggins-manuscript frame becameavailable. This emphasis on what the hobbit-reader would have foundas reassuring possibly explains the curtailment of the philosophical andreligious aspects of XXXXXXXX Silmarillion. It also gives a rationale for the excision of some more psychologically probing details in what was already,compared to the Tolkien writings that had been published previously, afar more somber set of narratives.XXXXXXXX year XXXXXXXX Silmarillion was published was the year the first Star Warsmovie came out. (Kane amusingly connects the two universes when hecompares [79] the inversions in Míriel’s speech to those of Yoda). In bothuniverses, the prequels (in Tolkien’s case, of course, originally conceivedfar earlier), XXXXXXXX Silmarillion and the late 1990s-early 2000s Star Wars films,had the difficult task of maintaining narrative continuity while dealingwith far darker subject matter. Kane’s absorbing study shows that Christopher made choices the reader might regret. But he generated a published text that paved the way for the continuing posthumous growth ofTolkien’s reputation.NICHOLAS BIRNSEUGENE LANG COLLEGE, THE NEW SCHOOLNEW YORK, NEW YORKChesterton and Tolkien as XXXXXXXXologians: XXXXXXXX Fantasy of the Real, by Alison Milbank. London and New York: T&T Clark, 2009. xvi, 184 pp. £19.99 /$39.95 (trade paperback) ISBN 9780567390417.A convincing argument may be made that the early twenty-first century is a new golden age of Tolkien criticism. Along with recent andnoteworthy works by long-established masters of Tolkien scholarship,outstanding book-length studies by “new” writers like John Garth, JohnD. Rateliff, and Diana Pavlac Glyer have swelled the Middle-earth scholar’s bookshelves with more absolutely essential tomes.To the forefront of that honor roll, add Alison Milbank’s magnificent Chesterton and Tolkien as XXXXXXXXologians, first published in hardcover inlate 2007 (ISBN 9780567040947) and now released in trade paperback.260Book Reviewssecond prophecy of Mandos and Morgoth’s final defeat at the end-time,would have imbalanced the tableau. XXXXXXXX Silmarillion was published in1977 in a way that plausibly could have been Bilbo Baggins’s translationsfrom the Elvish, for readers who would be as attuned to hobbit expectations of the Elder Days as was Bilbo himself. Kane points to this when,in his otherwise sketchy discussion of the “Akallabêth,” he demonstratesthat Christopher Tolkien took out those aspects of the tale which depended on it being told by Pengoloð, the external narrative focalizer inthe “Silmarillion”-era tales before the Baggins-manuscript frame becameavailable. This emphasis on what the hobbit-reader would have foundas reassuring possibly explains the curtailment of the philosophical andreligious aspects of XXXXXXXX Silmarillion. It also gives a rationale for the excision of some more psychologically probing details in what was already,compared to the Tolkien writings that had been published previously, afar more somber set of narratives.XXXXXXXX year XXXXXXXX Silmarillion was published was the year the first Star Warsmovie came out. (Kane amusingly connects the two universes when hecompares [79] the inversions in Míriel’s speech to those of Yoda). In bothuniverses, the prequels (in Tolkien’s case, of course, originally conceivedfar earlier), XXXXXXXX Silmarillion and the late 1990s-early 2000s Star Wars films,had the difficult task of maintaining narrative continuity while dealingwith far darker subject matter. Kane’s absorbing study shows that Christopher made choices the reader might regret. But he generated a published text that paved the way for the continuing posthumous growth ofTolkien’s reputation.NICHOLAS BIRNSEUGENE LANG COLLEGE, THE NEW SCHOOLNEW YORK, NEW YORKChesterton and Tolkien as XXXXXXXXologians: XXXXXXXX Fantasy of the Real, by Alison Milbank. London and New York: T&T Clark, 2009. xvi, 184 pp. £19.99 /$39.95 (trade paperback) ISBN 9780567390417.A convincing argument may be made that the early twenty-first century is a new golden age of Tolkien criticism. Along with recent andnoteworthy works by long-established masters of Tolkien scholarship,outstanding book-length studies by “new” writers like John Garth, JohnD. Rateliff, and Diana Pavlac Glyer have swelled the Middle-earth scholar’s bookshelves with more absolutely essential tomes.To the forefront of that honor roll, add Alison Milbank’s magnificent Chesterton and Tolkien as XXXXXXXXologians, first published in hardcover inlate 2007 (ISBN 9780567040947) and now released in trade paperback.261Book ReviewsProdigious and polymathic in its allusions to fiction, folklore, theology,philosophy, economics, papal encyclicals, and literary criticism, it is rooted deeply in insightful comprehension of the works of both authors. Itweaves Elvish ropes linking the two together in ways few—if any—othercritical works have done.Of course, writing an opus like this one is fraught with perils for thosewho would link Faërie to the Cathedral. “XXXXXXXXrein lies the problem withbooks of this sort,” wrote this reviewer of Stratford Caldecott’s XXXXXXXX Powerof the Ring: XXXXXXXX Spiritual Vision behind “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings” (2005). “XXXXXXXXreader perforce has two subjects to weigh and balance: literary scholarship and theological interpretation” (294).This long and narrow bridge over the abyss Dr. Milbank has crossedsure-footedly. A lecturer at the University of Nottingham, she has described herself in an online interview as “a literary scholar of the Victorian period and the Gothic novel, with interests in all manner of non-realist fiction: fantasy, horror, and mystery. I am also an Anglican priest.”As one who has written and spoken on the spiritual links between theShire and the Flying Inn, taught university classes linking the two writers(as she has), and discussed Chesterton’s influence on Tolkien with (amongothers) Priscilla Tolkien and George Sayer, this reviewer was impressedfrom the first page of the preface, which sets forth the order of the book,to the conclusion wherein Milbank looks back lucidly on her topic in afine finale linking Father Christmas, Santa Claus, and Tom Bombadil.By only the second page, Milbank conjoins Tolkien’s greatest tale toWelshman David Jones’s wartime epic, In Parenthesis (1937), which “juxtaposes ordinary soldier talk of a range of periods with mythic tales inorder to give heroism and significance to the common people” (ix). XXXXXXXXpower and the glory of this study is foretold, and, like all foretellings inTolkien and Chesterton, the prophecy is fulfilled.One virtue of this work is the author’s mastery of existing criticismof Chesterton and, especially, Tolkien. She stands tall and sees far because she stands on the giants’ shoulders. Likewise, her understandingof Dante provides a connection between her subjects and his Divine Comedy. Her small “c” catholic incorporation of sources as variegated as thePre-Raphaelites, Agatha Christie, E. M. Forster, David Hume, ThomasAquinas, Eric Gill, Jacques Maritain, Alfred Noyes, Peter Pan, Pope LeoXIII’s Rerum Novarum, and J. K. Rowling—all these in the introductionalone—is stunning and superb.A few immediate quibbles: while the text, typography, editing, andlayout are impeccable, the book is bound too tightly. Words in the innermargins roll into the gutter; the spine resists overmuch, and thus annoyingly many words are lost in the crack. Also, for coherent reading, twobookmarks are required: one for text, one for endnotes, located at the262Book Reviewsend of each chapter. Footnotes would have been more felicitous.XXXXXXXX first of Milbank’s five chapters, “Making Strange: XXXXXXXX Fantastic,” is the Introit. Immanuel Kant, Joan Aiken, Phillip Pullman, and Gertrude Stein lead her to this declaration: “We believe in ents, dwarves, etc.,because we experience them through hobbit eyes; we believe in the hobbits . . . because they are our focalizers” (41). Throughout, she generouslylards her study with fat quotes from Tolkien and Chesterton. Beware theside effect: readers will go clambering up their shelves for XXXXXXXX Ball and theCross (1909) and other books too long unread.Her exegesis of the delay at Moria due to the password “Speak,Friend and Enter” sapiently suggests that “Legolas and Gimli had beenbickering, and the door gave an example . . . of the friendship the Fellowship themselves need if they are to complete their task” (46). XXXXXXXXcoupling of the risen Gandalf ’s reappearance in XXXXXXXX Two Towers withJesus’s two encounters with Mary Magdalene in John 20 and Luke 24underscores Milbank’s priestly mastery of scripture.XXXXXXXX second chapter, “XXXXXXXX Grotesque,” begins by connecting DanteGabriel Rossetti’s and John Millais’s religious paintings, and the outcrythey evoked to these authors. “Chesterton’s vision of controlling a million monsters finds a parallel in Tolkien’s attitude to ‘the wilderness ofthe dragons’ of the Northern pagan past”(60-61). Treebeard gets especial attention as Tolkien’s best grotesque creation, and Milbank takes hersubtle knife to the difference between Tolkien’s text and Peter Jackson’sfilms. XXXXXXXX dwarves embody “this created action of the grotesque . . .[they] are short, stone-hard and fierce, reflected also in their greed forgold and antipathy to trees” (65). Gimli’s daring but unmaterialistic request for a single hair from Galadriel betokens the coming transcendenceof the dwarves. Milbank might have noticed that in the First Age, Galadriel denied Fëanor, the most cunning of the Eldar, a single hair. But, asshe says: “Arabesque elf and grotesque dwarf [rise above] their origins intheir friendship and in the growth towards understanding of each other’saesthetic” (65).Shelob, Gollum, and Ungoliant draw their due as grotesques. Thoughin this review, Milbank’s comments on Tolkien are the focus, her allianceof his views to Chesterton’s is well-woven throughout. Her exposition onthe artwork of both shines further light on their fictive fellowship. Here,too, the elements of Dante in both are astutely itemized. Tom Bombadil,who will play a major role in her conclusion, is the final puzzle-pieceintroduced.In her third chapter, “Paradox and Riddles,” Milbank links Chesterton’s infatuation with paradox to Tolkien’s with riddles, noting that Bilbo,Bombadil, and Aragorn are all riddles and riddlers. Indeed, paradox applies to Frodo and Sam as well. “XXXXXXXX true happy ending of the novel lies263Book Reviewsbeyond the pages of the book, and yet is anticipated in moments such asSam and Frodo’s descent from Mount Doom, when Sam, a true Bunyanesque ‘Hopeful’, leads the lost and broken Frodo to safety” (111).“Can I thank no one for the birthday present of birth?”: Chesterton’shumble query from Orthodoxy (1908), begins the fourth chapter, “FairyEconomics: Gift Exchange.” Here this study begins to rise on the windbeneath its wings. Milbank writes: “For us gift-giving belongs to the private realm: we take off the price tag and wrap a commodity in tissuepaper to remove it from the world of market-value and exchange; weturn it into a present, and thus restore it to the sacred: we enchant it,as it were” (118). This contrasts with Saruman’s dehumanization of hiswage-slave workers in contrast to Beowulf, Belloc, Chesterton, and Tolkien’s economic philosophy of Distributism, hallowed by Pope Leo XIII.Niggle’s eucatastrophe—“It’s a gift!”—joins hands with the pub sign inXXXXXXXX Flying Inn (1914): “Beer is freely given under the inn sign from whatappears to be a Cana-like never-emptied barrel” (122).“It is no accident that Niggle’s subject is a tree because trees havebeen emblematic of the divine gift right back to the Garden of Eden andits Tree of Life” (126-27). XXXXXXXX chapter’s last three pages on Galadriel’sgifts to the Fellowship, with the “binding rite” of the Norse and AngloSaxon cup which she performs, brilliantly bind that moment to the taleof the Ring.XXXXXXXX fifth and final chapter, “Fairy Poetics: Make Believe,” wraps thissuperlative gift in the finest Yule finery. A tender commentary on Tolkien’s twenty years of Father Christmas letters—will his children’s lettersin reply, a gift indeed, ever be published?—harmonizes with Dickens’sScrooge, the Magi chronicle in Matthew, and Chesterton’s observationsabout Father Christmas in XXXXXXXX Everlasting Man (1925). Milbank’s identification of Tom Bombadil, a figure looming large throughout this book,with Father Christmas is the perfect Ite, Missa est.A five-page conclusion begins with the poetic “A, a, a, DOMINE DEUS”by David Jones, from his XXXXXXXX Sleeping Lord and Other Fragments (1974), andends with this benediction: “Tolkien’s ‘other’ world is always in relationto our own, and his fantastic opens a space in which we can imagine andentertain the seemingly impossible in such a way that we can both literally and metaphorically ‘assist in the effoliation and multiple enrichmentof creation.’ For it is only through the re-enchantment of the world byour creative vision that we will find the courage and resources to preventits rape and destruction” (168-69).In the review of Stratford Caldecott’s XXXXXXXX Power of the Ring mentionedabove, this reviewer declared: “Reducing XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings to a Christian allegory similar to C.S. Lewis’s Narnian tales is mistaking a crucial part for the whole. As critics as diverse as Tom Shippey and Joseph264Book ReviewsPearce point out, one need not share the author’s faith to cherish his tale.Many other things are at work in it: Tolkien’s love of trees and loathingof technology, his enjoyment of good food, good friends, good cheer, andgood beer, his nostalgia for the ‘little England’ of bygone days, his experiences in the trenches of World War One. Caldecott’s book is colored byviewing all these through the stained-glass lens of faith” (297). With allrespect to Caldecott, who Milbank cites with approbation in Chestertonand Tolkien as XXXXXXXXologians, Catholicism’s stained-glass becomes clear andbright as the light of Eärendil. Through her puissant and polished prose,we can see clearly now.MIKE FOSTERMETAMORA, ILLINOISWORKS CITED——. “Interview with Dr. Alison Milbank author of Chesterton and Tolkienas XXXXXXXXologians” Tolkien Library website, <http://www.tolkienlibrary.com/press/Chesterton_and_Tolkien_as_XXXXXXXXologians.php> [Posted 22 October 2007; accessed February 2009]Foster, Mike. Rev. of XXXXXXXX Power of the Ring: XXXXXXXX Spiritual Vision Behind XXXXXXXXLord of the Rings, by Stratford Caldecott. Tolkien Studies 4 (2007):293-297.Simonson, Martin. XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings and the Western Narrative Tradition. Zurich and Jena: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. 256 pp. $22.80 /£11.50 (trade paperback) ISBN 9783905703092. Cormarë Series no.16.XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings is a house built on many foundations. Almost adecade ago, the late Daniel Timmons pointed out that “detractors rarelyrecognize that the literary aspects of Tolkien’s work have been prominent in Western literature from Homer to the present day” (Clark andTimmons 3). Worse, it would seem that many of Tolkien’s proponents areequally unaware of this heritage. Timmons went on to say that “althoughcriticism exists on Tolkien’s works in relation to medieval literature andtwentieth-century fantasy, relatively few studies situate the author in abroader context. Tolkien’s writings have links to every major period ofEnglish literature from Old English to Renaissance poetics to religiousepic to nineteenth-century popular narrative” (5). It is this large gap inthe scholarship that Martin Simonson aims to spotlight in his new study,XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings and the Western Narrative Tradition, which expands onhis previous work, published in volume three of Tolkien Studies (2006), as264Book ReviewsPearce point out, one need not share the author’s faith to cherish his tale.Many other things are at work in it: Tolkien’s love of trees and loathingof technology, his enjoyment of good food, good friends, good cheer, andgood beer, his nostalgia for the ‘little England’ of bygone days, his experiences in the trenches of World War One. Caldecott’s book is colored byviewing all these through the stained-glass lens of faith” (297). With allrespect to Caldecott, who Milbank cites with approbation in Chestertonand Tolkien as XXXXXXXXologians, Catholicism’s stained-glass becomes clear andbright as the light of Eärendil. Through her puissant and polished prose,we can see clearly now.MIKE FOSTERMETAMORA, ILLINOISWORKS CITED——. “Interview with Dr. Alison Milbank author of Chesterton and Tolkienas XXXXXXXXologians” Tolkien Library website, <http://www.tolkienlibrary.com/press/Chesterton_and_Tolkien_as_XXXXXXXXologians.php> [Posted 22 October 2007; accessed February 2009]Foster, Mike. Rev. of XXXXXXXX Power of the Ring: XXXXXXXX Spiritual Vision Behind XXXXXXXXLord of the Rings, by Stratford Caldecott. Tolkien Studies 4 (2007):293-297.Simonson, Martin. XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings and the Western Narrative Tradition. Zurich and Jena: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. 256 pp. $22.80 /£11.50 (trade paperback) ISBN 9783905703092. Cormarë Series no.16.XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings is a house built on many foundations. Almost adecade ago, the late Daniel Timmons pointed out that “detractors rarelyrecognize that the literary aspects of Tolkien’s work have been prominent in Western literature from Homer to the present day” (Clark andTimmons 3). Worse, it would seem that many of Tolkien’s proponents areequally unaware of this heritage. Timmons went on to say that “althoughcriticism exists on Tolkien’s works in relation to medieval literature andtwentieth-century fantasy, relatively few studies situate the author in abroader context. Tolkien’s writings have links to every major period ofEnglish literature from Old English to Renaissance poetics to religiousepic to nineteenth-century popular narrative” (5). It is this large gap inthe scholarship that Martin Simonson aims to spotlight in his new study,XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings and the Western Narrative Tradition, which expands onhis previous work, published in volume three of Tolkien Studies (2006), as265Book Reviewswell as in various collections from Walking Tree Publishers.Source-scholars have long argued that a wide variety of literarysources forms one foundation on which XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings is built. Simonson attempts to extrapolate a larger, more generalized theorem fromthis argument—that XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings may be regarded as an accretionnot merely of sources, but of genres, revealing the influence of the majormilestones in the history of western (that is to say, European) narrativeliterature: the mythic, epic, romantic, and novelistic traditions. In parallelto this, Simonson attempts to apply Northrop Frye’s theory of modes—though not so much his theory of genres (both expounded in Anatomy ofCriticism)—to XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings. XXXXXXXX book consists of five chapters, ofvastly disproportionate lengths: the first and final chapters, no more thanan introduction and afterword, are each less than five pages; the fourthchapter is more than one hundred. XXXXXXXX second provides a general summary of the western narrative tradition, without reference to Tolkien.XXXXXXXX third chapter introduces Frye’s mode of ironic myth in the contextof Tolkien and several Modernist writers. XXXXXXXX fourth, the centerpiece ofthe book, examines many aspects of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings in the contextof what Simonson calls the “intertraditional dialogue.” While a certainamount of background material may be necessary, fully one-third of thebook (19–93) has almost nothing to say about XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings or itsauthor, barring only occasional (and superficial) points of contact.From the outset, a main contention is that it is difficult to assign XXXXXXXXLord of the Rings to a discrete genre. What Simonson never makes clear,however, is why this should present a problem for readers or scholars.Walking Tree series editor Thomas Honegger offers a preemptive answer in his Preface: “Its defiance of traditional critical categories andthe critics’ difficulties to link it to a definite genre seems [sic] to lie atthe heart of many a dismissive response” (5). Yet there are questions leftunanswered. For instance: why is it inadequate to identify the genre as“prose romance,” “heroic quest,” or simply “fantasy,” as many sympathetic critics have done?Frye himself called XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings “quest romance” (Notebooks onRomance 80) and “sentimental romance” (Notebooks for Anatomy 111, 274).Frye’s own generalized definition of romantic literature, particularly itssecond clause, seems perfectly applicable to XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings:(1) A fictional mode in which the chief characters live in aworld of marvels (naive romance), or in which the mood iselegiac or idyllic and hence less subject to social criticism thanin the mimetic modes. (2) XXXXXXXX general tendency to presentmyth and metaphor in an idealized human form, midwaybetween undisplaced myth and “realism.” (Anatomy 367)266Book ReviewsThat XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings may exhibit aspects of other genres atdiverse points should present no difficulty. Frye points out that “the formsof prose fiction are mixed, like racial strains in human beings, not separable like the sexes” (Anatomy 305). And what of Honegger’s explanation,that critics may dismiss XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings because they cannot identifyits genre? Frye admonishes such careless critics: “William Morris shouldnot be left on the side lines of prose fiction merely because the critic hasnot learned to take the romance form seriously. Nor . . . should his choiceof that form be regarded as an ‘escape’ from his social attitude” (loc. cit.).XXXXXXXX reprimand applies equally well, mutatis mutandis, to Tolkien’s critics.As for Edmund Wilson, who infamously dismissed Tolkien’s masterpiece as “juvenile trash,” Frye has an answer for him too: “Romance isolder than the novel, a fact which has developed the historical illusion that itis something to be outgrown, a juvenile and undeveloped form” (Anatomy306, emphasis added). Frye described his own reading of XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings as “with great & almost uncritical pleasure” (Notebooks for Anatomy284), but I daresay no one would accuse him of exhibiting “a life-longappetite for juvenile trash.” Insatiably curious researchers are invited tovisit the Special Collections of Victoria University Library (in the University of Toronto system), which holds a copy of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringspersonally annotated by Frye.XXXXXXXX primacy of genre may be questioned from another angle as well.Richard West has contended that Tolkien’s work “usually suffers whencurrent genre theory is applied to it;” instead, “it is more reasonable toattempt to establish a new genre that more accurately limns the outlinesof this type of narrative . . . ‘the twentieth-century romance’” (West 9).Simonson sidesteps the more fundamental questions of genre in his zealfor advancing the view that Tolkien’s masterpiece represents all the majorgenres of the western narrative tradition combined. Admirers of Tolkien(myself included) will be sympathetic to his enthusiasm, and fortunately,Simonson’s analysis, in extenso, is more convincing than not.Where Simonson is at his best is in his demonstration that there isa progression of “intertraditional dialogues” at work in XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings, a discovery which has the potential to add a great deal to our understanding of the work. But before he can lay out this argument, Simonson must set up the necessary background on the history of the western narrative tradition. In his second chapter, he traces its developmentwith great care, from the epic tradition (represented by Homer, Virgil,Appolonius, Rhodius, and the anonymous Beowulf-poet) to the romance(medieval, renaissance, and modern); thence, to the “fantasy novels” ofTolkien’s immediate forebears, George MacDonald and William Morris. Such a backdrop is clearly important because “the study of genres is267Book Reviewsbased on analogies in form” (Frye Anatomy 95), and those formal analogieswill come up again and again in Simonson’s subsequent analysis. Thishistorical review might have benefited from including the Bible; thoughnot strictly part of the western narrative tradition per se, its influence onthat tradition is beyond question. Where Simonson’s survey begins withepic literature, incorporating the Bible into his study would have offeredhim a bridge further back in time, to mythic literature. Neither does Simonson make room for relevant “extraliterary” material—the bestiaries,chronologies, hagiographies, and annals that provided Tolkien with inspiration. This material lies outside a self-imposed ambit but could havebuttressed his case. To his credit, Simonson deftly handles the materialhe chose to include.Simonson begins his third chapter with a short appraisal of criticalopinion on the question of the genre of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings. But I findthe survey too abortive to support any extended analysis with genre atits heart. Simonson reflects only three opinions: those of Tom Shippey,Jared Lobdell, and Eduardo Segura. He errs in calling these “the mostrecent ones” (73): Shippey’s view certainly antedates the publication ofAuthor of the Century, and Lobdell’s is demonstrably almost thirty years old!(Simonson cites the 2004 edition of Lobdell’s book, XXXXXXXX World of the Rings:Language, Religion, and Adventure in Tolkien, but this is essentially a reissue,with a new title and some new material, of his 1981 book, England andAlways: Tolkien’s World of the Rings; it therefore only appears to be recent.)XXXXXXXX balance of the chapter is concerned with an intriguing, andmostly convincing, comparison between Tolkien and several Modernistwriters (to whom he is seldom likened): T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, JamesJoyce, David Jones, and an assortment of contemporary war poets. Here,Simonson owes an unacknowledged debt to John Garth—particularly inthe comparison to Wilfred Owen. XXXXXXXX yardstick against which Simonson measures each author’s work, including Tolkien’s, is Frye’s mode ofironic myth, which in Simonson’s interpretation “would seem to implyan encyclopaedic incorporation of the total literary heritage of the past,ironically contrasted with the present” (80). XXXXXXXX author’s decision to ignore Frye’s other modes—the mythic, romantic, low and high mimetic—is questionable. Though XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings demonstrates all five atvarious times (and occasionally, all at once), the ironic mode is more oftenthan not the least pertinent (Shippey Author 221–3; see also Shippey Road210–2). While it may certainly be found in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, it is really more applicable to a work like XXXXXXXX Hobbit. In Frye’s words, “the central principle of ironic myth is best approached as a parody of romance”(Anatomy 223, emphasis added), but I do not think most scholars wouldso describe XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings. Shippey feels (as I do) that the most often applicable of Frye’s five modes—to which Shippey suggests adding a268Book Reviewssixth, “true myth”—is the romantic.In spite of these misgivings, I find much of interest in the chapter onironic myth. XXXXXXXX best comparisons are with David Jones and T. S. Eliot.Jones drew on the traditions of northwestern Europe to assemble a mythic backdrop for his poem, In Parenthesis—published the same year as XXXXXXXXHobbit. In much the same way Tolkien wished to recreate a lost Englishmythology, Jones was attempting to extrapolate a sense of “Britishness”to contextualize his poem, and both authors mined similar mythic oreto do so. For Eliot’s Four Quartets, Simonson has something to say abouteach of its four constituent poems, published 1935–1942, but particularly “East Coker” and “Little Gidding.” Jared Lobdell, too, noticed therelevance of the latter (1, 71); the original title of his book, England andAlways, is an answer to Eliot’s lines: “Here, the intersection of the timeless moment / is England and nowhere. Never and always.”From here, Simonson proceeds to an extended comparison betweenTolkien and the triumvirate of Modernism: Joyce, Eliot, and Pound.More often, these authors are vigorously contrasted with Tolkien, but Simonson observes that all four achieved a remarkably self-referential literature through an intensive use of allusion. What chiefly (but not always)differs is their source material. XXXXXXXXy are also unanimously concernedto reflect a “simultaneity of traditions” (101); it is which traditions theychose, and how they reflected them, that varies. And finally, they may allbe scrutinized through the lens of Frye’s ironic mode. XXXXXXXX difference isthat with the Modernists, the irony is internal and intentional; with Tolkien, external and accidental (102).XXXXXXXX real bulk of the book—more than half of its 225 pages—is taken up by the fourth chapter. From its first pages, the author sets up his keyquestions: How do the four major narrative traditions—the mythic, epic,romantic, and novelistic—interrelate with one another over the courseof XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, and what are the limits to this intertraditionaldialogue? To answer them, the author puts forward a bewilderingly intricate rubric (114–6). Building in part on Bakhtin’s concept of the “literarychronotope,” Simonson defines three narrative levels, each of which consists of several sublevels. His system includes: I) the Generic NarrativeLevel, consisting of the 1) mythic, 2) epic, 3) romantic, and 4) novelistictraditions; II) the Situational Narrative Level, consisting of five main influences: 1) physical space, 2) characters, 3) theme, 4) action, and 5) focalization; and III) the Transitional Narrative Level, consisting of seventransitional types, in two groups: A) Prepared Transitions, comprisingthe 1) accepted invitation, 2) rejected invitation, 3) dialogue, 4) mélange,and 5) meta-dialogue; and B) Unprepared Transitions, comprising the 1)intruder and 2) arrested intruder.Out of this elaborate nomenclature, the most important pieces by far269Book Reviewsare the four generic traditions (mythic, epic, romantic, and novelistic).Simonson devotes most of the chapter to these, as well as to the mé-lange—the intermingling, or “intertraditional dialogue,” as he frequentlyrefers to it—between them. He illustrates them with a series of looselyorganized studies of important characters and settings in XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings. Other elements in his highly systematized approach are given lessattention, but Simonson offers some particularly astute observations on“focalization” (129, 211, 217) and the “arrested intruder” (133, 180,185). Put concisely, focalization refers to a sudden change in the activenarrator—as when Shelob renders Frodo unconscious, necessitating animmediate focal shift to Sam. An arrested intruder, on the other hand,makes a failed attempt to introduce elements drawn from other generictraditions into the one currently dominating the story—as when Bilbocalls for a lunch-break during the Council of Elrond, but the attemptedintrusion of quotidian, novelistic concerns fails to interrupt the epic proceedings.Simonson’s character studies (Aragorn, Gandalf, Frodo) and his analyses of some of the novel’s key locations (the Shire, Rivendell, Moria) areabsorbing, if selective, and they offer new insights. Throughout, Simonson is at pains to demonstrate “the intricate fabric of narrative strategiesTolkien had to weave” (137). In my view, he makes too little use of thedraft material published in the middle volumes of the History of Middleearth. While he acknowledges that this is not his aim (117), I hope thatfuture scholarship will build on Simonson’s work by demonstrating howthese interwoven strategies came to be assembled so coherently over sucha protracted period of writing and revision. “What Tolkien’s sometimesmaddening hesitations show,” Shippey notes, “is exactly how difficult hefound that blend of ancient and modern, realistic and fantastic, whichin the end he developed so successfully” (Road 321). Likewise, there isinsufficient contextualization with XXXXXXXX Hobbit. XXXXXXXXre are only hints of itin Simonson’s study, as where he notes that the “Last Homely House”image of Rivendell from XXXXXXXX Hobbit has really become the image of Breeand XXXXXXXX Prancing Pony in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings. Rivendell, then, mustbecome something greater and must draw nearer to an epic, romantic,and even mythic mélange. I would have liked more of this.I find Simonson’s discussion of the final book of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsespecially engrossing and his interpretation nuanced and sophisticated.By the point of the novel’s dénouement, Simonson observes, the three principal protagonists, Frodo, Aragorn, and Gandalf, have largely lost the“intertraditional flexibility” each had previously demonstrated, resulting in “a much flatter narrative, resembling a regular prose romance, inwhich the epic and mythic elements practically disappear from the tale”(219). At the same time, he points out that the return journey to the Shire270Book Reviewsis a “physical and generic return,” in which the hobbits “disencumber thenarrative of the characters and the sceneries that used to imply changesin the intertraditional dialogue” (218, my emphasis). Finally, in Simonson’s view:Frodo comes to embody Tolkien’s particular approach toironic myth, describing with his example and in his narrativea circular movement from the novel and back towards myth,incorporating in the process other narrative traditions of thepast with great fluency while at the same time yielding spaceto twentieth-century concerns. (217)As worthwhile as Simonson’s conclusions, and as thorough the evidence he marshals to make them, one could wish for greater elaboration.For example, Simonson relegates the “decidedly novelistic character” ofSaruman to a mere footnote (193). Of Éomer, he writes only that he is“firmly rooted in the epic and chanson de geste traditions” (208). EvenGimli and Legolas are given short shrift. Simonson ascribes them both“narrative neutrality” (164), but he does not explain why this should beor what its significance to the larger interplay of characters and traditions. He says almost nothing at all about Galadriel and Lothlórien.His treatment of the intertraditional dialogue in its various manifestations is likewise abbreviated. Simonson notes that “the present analysisis not an attempt at disclosing all the aspects of the interaction betweentraditions in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings— this would be impossible in a work ofthis limited extension” (116). But any limits were self-imposed; the bookcould easily have been longer. What Simonson does, he does well, but thesurvey of intertraditional dialogues, as well as the character- and scenestudies, seem needlessly selective and curtailed.Reviewers, more than casual readers, are apt to notice errors andoversights. In Simonson’s list of “publications that have most frequentlyincluded articles on Tolkien” (13 n1), the omissions of Tolkien Studies andVII: An Anglo-American Review are startling. XXXXXXXX Ivy Bush and XXXXXXXX GreenDragon inns were not in Hobbiton (121), but rather on the BywaterRoad and in Bywater, respectively. Simonson’s declares ominously that“[the Ringwraiths] have come to find the One Ring and will stop atnothing until they find it” (123), but this is certainly hyperbolic. Otherexamples of hyperbole: calling the War of the Ring a “global conflict”(179)—at most, it is continental; and calling Sauron “Ilúvatar’s enemy”(216)—true, but irrelevant.During his discussion of Gandalf, Simonson calls it a “mysterious assertion that Boromir ‘escaped’ before he died.” Simonson continues:271Book ReviewsEscape from what? And what did the hobbits have to do withit? One possible interpretation is that . . . Boromir’s soul wassaved due to his repentance, and the hobbits provided himwith a just cause that helped him achieve heroic redemptionin battle. (192)One possible interpretation? Is this not—precisely and unambiguously—the intended reading? But in an article published several months afterhis book, Simonson has reconsidered. He still finds Gandalf ’s assertionmysterious (I do not), but now it is “the only possible interpretation”(“Similarities and Differences” 7).XXXXXXXX book, overall, is clear and well-written; however, a fair numberof isolated peculiarities of style, spelling, and usage catch the eye—e.g.,“such an approach would only refrain the reader” (14), “without hardlyany” (116, 146), and “humoristic” (125, 128, 170, passim), to give but afew examples. Also, it is Edoras, not Édoras (172). I suspect that someof these irregularities arose because of the author’s movements betweenEnglish and Spanish, a guess corroborated by spelling errors such as“antropomorphic” (Spanish antropomórfico) and “ortography” (ortografía).Turning to paratextual elements, the index is serviceable, but incomplete. I noted many omissions, both in entries and in page references.XXXXXXXX index also has an interesting idiosyncrasy: Simonson gives the fullnames of literary figures, but abbreviates the first names of scholars andcritics. So, we have “Chaucer, Geoffrey,” but “Frye, N.” In the bibliography, Simonson provides two separate lists: primary sources and secondary. XXXXXXXX latter is further subdivided into sections containing scholarshipon genre and theory, on the Great War and Modernism, on Tolkien specifically, and finally, the not particularly useful “Dictionaries” (containingone specialized dictionary and one encyclopedia).Taken as a whole, XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings and the Western Narrative Tradition is an ambitious and intriguing new study. While neither faultlessnor comprehensive (so very few studies can be either), it nevertheless advances the study of Tolkien’s masterpiece in new directions. As I havesaid, I hope it will prove to be the starting point for further research bySimonson himself and others, examining XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings in bothgreater breadth—taking into account its development, history, and context among Tolkien’s other writings—and depth—exploring charactersand settings relegated to the sidelines in Simonson’s book. Until thattime, it provides another solid foundation (one of many) for approachingXXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings.JASON FISHERDALLAS, TEXAS272Book ReviewsWORKS CITEDClark, George, and Daniel Timmons, eds. J.R.R. Tolkien and His Literary Resonances: Views of Middle-Earth. Westport, CT: GreenwoodPress, 2000.Frye, Northrop. Anatomy of Criticism: Four Essays. Princeton: PrincetonUniversity Press, 1971.——. Northrop Frye’s Notebooks on Romance. Ed. Michael Dolzani. Toronto:University of Toronto Press, 2004. Collected Works of NorthropFrye, Volume 15.——. Northrop Frye’s Notebooks for Anatomy of Criticism. Ed. Robert D. Denham. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2007. CollectedWorks of Northrop Frye, Volume 23.Garth, John. Tolkien and the Great War: XXXXXXXX Threshold of Middle-earth. Boston:Houghton Mifflin, 2003.Lobdell, Jared. England and Always: Tolkien’s World of the Rings. Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 1981.Simonson, Martin. “XXXXXXXX Chronicles of Narnia and XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings: Similarities and Differences between Two Children of the GreatWar.” E-fabulations: E-journal Of Children’s Literature No. 2 (June2008). <http://ler.letras.up.pt/uploads/ficheiros/4669.pdf>.Retrieved 8 December 2008.Shippey, Tom. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2002.——. XXXXXXXX Road to Middle-earth: How J.R.R. Tolkien Created a New Mythology.Rev. and expanded ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 2003.West, Richard C. “Contemporary Medieval Authors.” Orcrist 3 (January1970): 9–10, 15.XXXXXXXX Mirror Crack’d: Fear and Horror in J.R.R. Tolkien’s Major Works, edited byLynn Forest-Hill. Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing,2008. viii, 246 pp. $69.99 / £34.99 (hardcover) ISBN 9781847186348.This anthology comprises ten essays, with an Introduction and Conclusion by the editor, and an index. Three of these essays (those by MariaRaffaella Benvenuto, Amy Amendt-Raduege, and Julie Pridmore) grewout of a session of the same name (sponsored by the Tolkien Society and272Book ReviewsWORKS CITEDClark, George, and Daniel Timmons, eds. J.R.R. Tolkien and His Literary Resonances: Views of Middle-Earth. Westport, CT: GreenwoodPress, 2000.Frye, Northrop. Anatomy of Criticism: Four Essays. Princeton: PrincetonUniversity Press, 1971.——. Northrop Frye’s Notebooks on Romance. Ed. Michael Dolzani. Toronto:University of Toronto Press, 2004. Collected Works of NorthropFrye, Volume 15.——. Northrop Frye’s Notebooks for Anatomy of Criticism. Ed. Robert D. Denham. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2007. CollectedWorks of Northrop Frye, Volume 23.Garth, John. Tolkien and the Great War: XXXXXXXX Threshold of Middle-earth. Boston:Houghton Mifflin, 2003.Lobdell, Jared. England and Always: Tolkien’s World of the Rings. Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans, 1981.Simonson, Martin. “XXXXXXXX Chronicles of Narnia and XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings: Similarities and Differences between Two Children of the GreatWar.” E-fabulations: E-journal Of Children’s Literature No. 2 (June2008). <http://ler.letras.up.pt/uploads/ficheiros/4669.pdf>.Retrieved 8 December 2008.Shippey, Tom. J.R.R. Tolkien: Author of the Century. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 2002.——. XXXXXXXX Road to Middle-earth: How J.R.R. Tolkien Created a New Mythology.Rev. and expanded ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 2003.West, Richard C. “Contemporary Medieval Authors.” Orcrist 3 (January1970): 9–10, 15.XXXXXXXX Mirror Crack’d: Fear and Horror in J.R.R. Tolkien’s Major Works, edited byLynn Forest-Hill. Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing,2008. viii, 246 pp. $69.99 / £34.99 (hardcover) ISBN 9781847186348.This anthology comprises ten essays, with an Introduction and Conclusion by the editor, and an index. Three of these essays (those by MariaRaffaella Benvenuto, Amy Amendt-Raduege, and Julie Pridmore) grewout of a session of the same name (sponsored by the Tolkien Society and273Book Reviewsorganized by the editor) at Leeds University’s 2006 International Medieval Congress, which had the theme “Emotion & Gesture.”Maria Raffaella Benvenuto’s brief essay, “From Beowulf to the Balrogs: XXXXXXXX Roots of Fantastic Horror in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,” arguesthat the darker, gothic, side of Tolkien’s work has been ignored in favorof its brighter realms. H. P. Lovecraft, she points out, traced much ofmodern horror fiction back to medieval sources, and in fact the terrifyingelements of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings regularly have earlier and more recentparallels and antecedents: various critics have pointed out resemblancesbetween the Balrog and Surtr, Gollum and Grendel, the Ringwraiths andvampires, Sauron and the deathless sorcerer. All of these are, Benvenutosays, masterpieces of horror, and they illustrate the range of topics available for further research in Tolkien’s dark side.Jessica Burke, in “Fear and Horror: Monsters in Tolkien and Beowulf,” asks “what the monster is and how it exists in relation to appetite,corruption, the quest for power, and the nature of evil” (15). Drawing onsources as diverse as Darwin’s studies of emotion and feminist biblicalscholarship, she considers Melkor, Sauron, Ungoliant, Shelob, Gollum,Grendel, Grendel’s mother and Cain. Monsters are deformed versionsof ourselves, used since the Middle Ages as a tool of self-understanding;pushed to the margins, they are both warnings against and scapegoats forthe violation of society’s rules. Even in the safety of reading, they exciteterror, particularly when they invite us to imagine our being unmade.Thus, the Beowulf-poet terrifies by showing a world in which monstersand heroes alike will be unmade. Melkor seeks to unmake Arda, Grendel,Heorot. Gollum resembles both Grendel and Shelob in monstrous ways:nonetheless, he is finally horrifying because we identify with him and canimagine how we might be unmade in the face of a challenge too greatfor us. XXXXXXXX discussion of evil (28-31) misconstrues the Augustinian/Boethian position, and there are some errors in detail, e.g., Tolkien suggeststhat Shelob came from drowned Beleriand, not Númenor (32) and theBeowulf-poet says that Cain, not Grendel, is the father of all monsters (36,cf. lines 111-115).In “Of Spiders and (the Medieval Aesthetics of) Light: Hope and Action in the Horrors of Shelob’s Lair,” Reno E. Lauro begins an overviewof medieval aesthetics with a historical sketch of the Early Middle Ages(anachronistically identifying St. Patrick as an agent of Anglo-SaxonChristianity, the missionaries to the English as Augustinians, and Charlemagne as Holy Roman Emperor), then contrasts the medieval Neo-Platonist and Aristotelian philosophies of light. Tolkien’s imaginative reconstruction of the Crist’s reference to “earendel” recovers (à la Barfield) an“ancient semantic unity” deeply tied to a metaphysics of light. Beginningwith the Flame Imperishable in the “Ainulindalë” (which Lauro, citing274Book ReviewsTolkien’s letter to Milton Waldman, connects, with little textual support,directly to the Two Trees), light is a fundamental element of the legendarium, as also is its absence, darkness as a privation of the good. Shelob’sLair harkens back to the darkness of the Void, and the light of Eärendilnot only gives hope to Sam and Frodo, but calls them to action. Similarly,for Tolkien creativity, sub-creation, is a form of recovery of semanticunity which constitutes “a call to confront, resist and transform the world” (70,emphasis in original). Sub-creation as practiced by the Elves at their bestis a form of revelation, art used in the service of recovery; as practicedby Sauron, it is possessive, dominating, corrupting. All this recalls the philosophy of Heidegger, for whom both Art and Technology are ways ofrevealing the truth (a-leitheia, “that which is unhidden”), though the useof Technology always carries the risk of alienating ourselves “from ourexistential state of poetic dwelling” (74). Tolkien depicts not only horrorbut also, through his light imagery, our appropriate response to it: courage that comes from recovery of our basic way of being in the world.Rainer Nagel’s essay, “Shelob and her Kin: XXXXXXXX Evolution of Tolkien’s Spiders,” considers both internal development of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Ringsand English etymology in response to claims that Shelob is ill-conceivedbecause she does not grow out of folkloric roots. In early drafts, Frodowas to fall victim to a group of spiders like those in XXXXXXXX Hobbit: successive versions saw them become more like the huge spiders of Beleriandand then come together in one great opponent. Bilbo calls the spidersin Mirkwood “Attercop,” from an Old English word for spider, “attorcoppe,” literally “poison-cup, poison-head,” where “-cop” itself alreadymeans spider, as in “cobweb.” “She-lob,” on the other hand, uses OldEnglish “lobbe” (spider). Tolkien, Nagel suggests, would have noted thatOld English sources use “attor-cope” only in secular contexts, “lobbe”only in religious ones, even when translating the same Latin word (andwould also have appreciated that “spider” apparently replaced “lobbe”historically because the latter could, inconveniently, mean both “spider”and “fly”). Her name, then, encapsulating spiritual menace, indicatesthat Shelob holds an appropriate place among Tolkien’s monsters.In “XXXXXXXX Shadow beyond the Firelight: pre-Christian Archetypes andImagery Meet Christian XXXXXXXXology in Tolkien’s Treatment of Evil andHorror,” Shandi Stevenson argues that Tolkien achieves a new synthesisof Christian theology with the worldview of the pagan north, therebycreating an “implicit ‘theory’ of evil” (93). Beginning with a brief account of the Germanic world’s “melancholy” outlook (95), she considersTolkien’s use of seven “elements” (such as darkness, forest, and monsters) borrowed from that world. XXXXXXXX relevant distinction for Tolkien indealing with these is always between good and evil, and the introduction of that moral element evokes the moment when the northern world275Book Reviewsencountered Christianity (Stevenson does concede that the pagan culturecould conceive of the world as evil [113]). In Tolkien’s Augustinian view,only good is creative; good “cherishes the ‘other’,” as opposed to seekingdominion over it; and the good will eventually conquer evil. Whereasthe pre-Christian North feared what evil might do, destroying even thegods themselves, the new Christian society, while confident of the finaltriumph of good, fears instead corruption: the possibility that one mightbecome evil. Unfortunately, the argument for this valuable insight reliesheavily on secondary sources and untenably subsumes all the encountersbetween the several Germanic tribes and various strands of Christianityunder one broad category.“XXXXXXXX Cry in the Wind and the Shadow on the Moon: Liminality and theConstruct of Horror in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings” by Michael Cunninghamgives an overview of the association of horror with the peril of liminalmoments, at literal or symbolic thresholds in Tolkien’s Secondary World:such thresholds often mark off “zones or theatres of conflict” in whichcharacters can interact with the landscape. He traces examples from theWoody End encounter with the Black Rider through the Old Forest, theBarrow Downs, Moria, Minas Morgul, and Cirith Ungol to the landscape of Mordor itself.Amy Amendt-Raduege’s “Barrows, Wights, and Ordinary People:XXXXXXXX Unquiet Dead in J.R.R. Tolkien’s XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings” discusses theBarrow-wight in terms of Icelandic barrow-dwelling draugr and haugbúi,of treasure-hoarding dragons, of St. Guthlac’s demons, and of spiritswho haunt their own graves. Noting that Tolkien shows us three setsof barrows—those on the downs, those lining the road to Edoras (significantly “mounds” rather than “barrows”), and the Dwimorberg—sheargues that the Barrow-wight, some follower of the treacherous WitchKing now revived by his near presence, shares with those who gather atthe Stone of Erech the crime of oath-breaking. Thus in Middle-earththose “who have committed no evil beyond the usual complement offaults and failings” rest at ease, like those in the Chamber of Mazarbul,under simblemynë or in Rath Dínen: the unquiet dead are those who “mustatone before they can find peace” (148). This holds out the hope that,whatever death is, it is not the horror of being confined forever underground with a decaying corpse.Romuald Ian Lakowski’s essay, “Horror and Anguish: XXXXXXXX Slayingof Glaurung and Medieval Dragon Lore,” surveys the complex development of Glaurung and Túrin in light of medieval (and, Spenser beingincluded, Renaissance) dragon lore mentioned in Tolkien’s unpublishedDragon Lecture, noting from the beginning that Túrin’s several failuresradically differentiate his saga from its models. In early stages of thesaga, Glorund shows a typical Germanic dragon’s interest in hoarded276Book Reviewstreasure; as the tale develops, malice and (paradoxically) bestiality become his prime characteristics. At each stage, Glorund/Glaurung hasspecific similarities to Fáfnir, not least in the manner of his death, aswell as to the Beowulf dragon. In early versions, Túrin battles the dragonfor three days, reminiscent of the Redcrosse Knight’s symbolic strugglewith the Dragon: Tolkien may have removed this detail in order to avoidthe parallel of Túrin to Christ. Sigurd’s reforged sword Gram contrastswith Túrin’s reforged Gurthang, while Fáfnir’s ægishjálmr (“helm of terror”—cf. Gorthol) and Prince Arthur’s dragon crest in XXXXXXXX Faerie Queeneboth provide parallels to the Dragon-helm of Dor-lómin. With dragons,then, as in other areas, Tolkien consistently draws on medieval lore whilereshaping it to suit his purposes.In “Shadow and Flame: Myth, Monsters and Mother Nature in Middle-earth,” Kristine Larsen considers human fear of the natural world.Drawing on Dorothy Vitilliano’s concept of geomythology—the ideathat cultural stories both etiologically “explain” natural occurrences andeuhemeristically preserve memories of great geological events—and expanding it to include astromythology, she discusses various key elementsof Tolkien’s legendarium considered as late-recorded versions of mythological events. In some cases, this approach is clearly correct: Tilion’s lovefor Arion is certainly an etiological account of solar eclipses (179-180).XXXXXXXX red glow in the north when the Valar attack Morgoth just after theElves awaken or as the dragons attack Gondolin also matches in form accounts of the Aurora Borealis as seen from relatively southern latitudes.Eärendil’s battle with Ancalagon may, then, logically be a euhemeristicaccount of a meteor shower coming from the direction of the planetVenus (186), and the trenches which trip Fingolfin in his battle with Morgoth may give an etiological account of the land around an active volcano (190). But given that (as Strider points out) Bilbo transcribed theselatter stories in the home of Eärendil’s son, the fit is less comfortable.XXXXXXXX problem is not Larsen’s, but Tolkien’s: partly the incomplete reconciliation between Tolkien’s early and late conceptions of the mythology, partly a basic incompatibility between his interest in the change ofcultural elements (language, mythology) over time and his conception ofelves as fundamentally undying. Galadriel, for example, would have hadfirst hand accounts both of the battle of the Valar and of how it lookedfrom Cuiviénen, and is unlikely to have mistaken her uncle’s futilely heroic death for his tumbling into a fumarole.After initial observations on the evil image of wolves in folklore, theirnear extinction, and the threatened status of their traditional enemy thewolfhound, “Evil Reputations: Images of Wolves in Tolkien’s Fiction” byJulie Pridmore catalogues wolf encounters in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, XXXXXXXXHobbit and various stages of the “Silmarillion”—also considering, in the277Book Reviewslatter case, the development of Huan. Pridmore then discusses possiblesources for these wolf and hound episodes (e.g., the hound in Njal’s Sagasets the example for Huan’s loyalty). Finally, the author discusses imagesof wolves (and wolfhounds) in Tolkien illustration and in the Bakshi andJackson films.As a whole, the collection would have benefited from closer proofreading: there is a distracting array of typographical (and even, in a fewcases, grammatical) errors.JOHN WILLIAM HOUGHTONTHE HILL SCHOOLPOTTSTOWN, PENNSYLVANIAMyth and Magic: Art according to the Inklings, ed. Eduardo Segura and ThomasHonegger. Zollikofen, Switzerland: Walking Tree Publishers, 2007. [6],iv, 342 pp. $21.25 / £10.35 (trade paperback) ISBN 9783905703085.Cormarë Series no. 14.This collection of essays undertakes a discussion of a subject ofgreat importance. Segura and Honegger explain in their Preface thattheir goal is to work towards “a profounder understanding of what theInklings considered the key of literary creation, and of Art” (ii). XXXXXXXX editors cite their hope that the volume will “become a first stepping-stone inthe process of reconstructing those conversations in which the Inklingsdiscussed, argued, and thoughtfully debated on Myth and Language”(iii). XXXXXXXX essays in the volume engage these central concerns from variousperspectives, examining the notions of myth-making and subcreation, ofmagic and art, as Lewis and Tolkien theorized about them in their critical writing and embodied them in their fiction.In drawing its readers into this complex and invigorating discussion,the book very appropriately directs our attention to the questions anddebates that lie near the center of Inkling studies. Lewis and Tolkien’sinquiries into the nature of myth and art and into the relationship between language, imagination, and subcreation inform almost all of theirpersonal and intellectual interests, such as linguistics, medieval literature,fairy-stories, poetry, and Christian apologetics. This is the fascinationthat drew the Inklings to each other and that unites their very differentfictional worlds. Segura and Honegger have done a great service to Inklings scholarship in raising these questions so evocatively.XXXXXXXX first chapter of the book is “Recovering the ‘Utterly Alien Land’:Tolkien and Transcendentalism” by Martin Simonson. In this essay, Simonson establishes a fascinating and fruitful new context for Tolkien’sconcept of Recovery, articulated in his essay “On Fairy-stories,” linking it277Book Reviewslatter case, the development of Huan. Pridmore then discusses possiblesources for these wolf and hound episodes (e.g., the hound in Njal’s Sagasets the example for Huan’s loyalty). Finally, the author discusses imagesof wolves (and wolfhounds) in Tolkien illustration and in the Bakshi andJackson films.As a whole, the collection would have benefited from closer proofreading: there is a distracting array of typographical (and even, in a fewcases, grammatical) errors.JOHN WILLIAM HOUGHTONTHE HILL SCHOOLPOTTSTOWN, PENNSYLVANIAMyth and Magic: Art according to the Inklings, ed. Eduardo Segura and ThomasHonegger. Zollikofen, Switzerland: Walking Tree Publishers, 2007. [6],iv, 342 pp. $21.25 / £10.35 (trade paperback) ISBN 9783905703085.Cormarë Series no. 14.This collection of essays undertakes a discussion of a subject ofgreat importance. Segura and Honegger explain in their Preface thattheir goal is to work towards “a profounder understanding of what theInklings considered the key of literary creation, and of Art” (ii). XXXXXXXX editors cite their hope that the volume will “become a first stepping-stone inthe process of reconstructing those conversations in which the Inklingsdiscussed, argued, and thoughtfully debated on Myth and Language”(iii). XXXXXXXX essays in the volume engage these central concerns from variousperspectives, examining the notions of myth-making and subcreation, ofmagic and art, as Lewis and Tolkien theorized about them in their critical writing and embodied them in their fiction.In drawing its readers into this complex and invigorating discussion,the book very appropriately directs our attention to the questions anddebates that lie near the center of Inkling studies. Lewis and Tolkien’sinquiries into the nature of myth and art and into the relationship between language, imagination, and subcreation inform almost all of theirpersonal and intellectual interests, such as linguistics, medieval literature,fairy-stories, poetry, and Christian apologetics. This is the fascinationthat drew the Inklings to each other and that unites their very differentfictional worlds. Segura and Honegger have done a great service to Inklings scholarship in raising these questions so evocatively.XXXXXXXX first chapter of the book is “Recovering the ‘Utterly Alien Land’:Tolkien and Transcendentalism” by Martin Simonson. In this essay, Simonson establishes a fascinating and fruitful new context for Tolkien’sconcept of Recovery, articulated in his essay “On Fairy-stories,” linking it278Book Reviewsnot only to the thinking of the English Romantics, but also to the theoriesof the American Transcendentalists Ralph Waldo Emerson and HenryDavid Thoreau. Simonson aptly indicates that Emerson and Thoreau’semphasis on language makes their thought particularly germane to Tolkien’s artistic undertaking: Thoreau, for instance, was attempting to develop a “mythic language of the wild to express a modern perception of theeternal and to recover a fresh perception of the world” (9). Through thelinguistic roots of his fiction and his dedication to unfolding the realityof his secondary world, Tolkien “updates Thoreau’s comparatively lameattempts at expressing a vision of timeless nature with a mythic grammarfor the contemporary reader” (17).In “New Learning and New Ignorance: Magic, Goeteia, and the Inklings,” Tom Shippey points out that the fiction of both Tolkien andLewis manifests their reflections on the different senses in which the word“magic” can be used, and the very different moral and spiritual implications of those senses. In this essay, Shippey engages primarily with thecriticism and fiction of Lewis, beginning with his long discussion at thebeginning of English Literature in the Sixteenth Century, Excluding Drama of thedifferences between the medieval conception of magic, associated withFaerie, and the Renaissance magia of books and spells, which is closelylinked both to scientia, scientific inquiry, and to goeteia, witchcraft or thesummoning of spirits. Shippey begins by challenging the strict dichotomythat Lewis asserts between medieval and Renaissance concepts of magic(27), and then turns to an exploration of Lewis’s various depictions ofmagic and its relation to both religion and science, focusing especially onLewis’s Space Trilogy. In an attempt to illustrate the complex inter-relations among the four primary concepts involved, Shippey schematicallysummarizes Lewis’s “attitude to magic” as a square which shows religionand magia on the one side opposed to scientism and goeteia on the other(43).Dieter Bachmann’s essay, “Words for Magic: goetia, gûl, and lúth,” examines Tolkien’s terms for magic and serves as an excellent complementto Shippey’s consideration of C.S. Lewis’s approach to the same question. Bachmann argues that, like Lewis, Tolkien appealed to the distinction between natural magic (magia) and ceremonial magic (goetia) but thathe insisted “that the moral distinction lies in the magician’s motive orpurpose, not in the technical question of whether he is acting on matteror on a spirit” (50). Bachmann thus derives a “fourfold division of different kinds of ‘magic’” (52). When ceremonial magic is used for power, itis manifested in necromancy, Renaissance witchcraft, or the “deceits” ofSauron; when its goal is wonder and “aesthetic pleasure,” it is manifestedin the magic of Faerie, in elvish enchantment (52). When natural magicis applied for domination, it results in industrialization and “the vulgar279Book Reviewsdevices of the laborious, scientific magician,” but natural magic can alsobe manifested in the wholesome delight in making, as evidenced in theSilmarils or Gandalf ’s fireworks.In “When is a Fairy Story a Faërie Story? Smith of Wootton Major,” Verlyn Flieger gives us an excellent and refreshing essay on a much-neglectedpiece of Tolkien’s fiction. Flieger demonstrates how Smith of Wootton Majorserves as a “practical application” of the criteria of a true fairy-story thatTolkien laid out in his essay “On Fairy-stories” (57). In his essay, Tolkienasserts that the heart of fairy-stories is the wonder of humans who somehow enter the Perilous Realm of Faërie, and Flieger argues that in Smith,Tolkien attempts to capture that marvelous and elusive atmosphere ofFaërie (58), providing his protagonist and his readers a glimpse of itswonders, even if not understanding. For this reason, Flieger pays Smitha most unusual sort of compliment, calling it “Tolkien’s severest, mostuncompromising, least accessible piece of fiction” (62). Flieger goes on tosuggest quite compellingly that Tolkien’s story of the craftsman in Faëriecan also be understood as “dramatizing the relationship of the artist withthe world of imagination,” thus encapsulating the experience of both thereader and the writer of fairy-stories.“Myth, Fact, and Incarnation” by Colin Duriez explores Lewis’s contemplation of the relationship between the abstract and the concrete,between history and truth. Duriez argues that Lewis finds this link inthe imagination, claiming that a “thing captured by the imagination . . .belongs to the world of experience, sensation, and contingency and yetembodies general qualities of meaning by the very nature of imaginativeperception” (74). XXXXXXXX essay goes on to show that Lewis viewed myth as“the greatest achievement of the imagination,” as it had “the ability tomake concrete what would otherwise remain abstract” (89). Finally, Duriez argues that for Lewis the “complete reconciliation of the abstractconcrete division” is the “incarnation of the divine in the human,” themoment at which “myth became fact” (96).Patrick Curry compares Tolkien’s concerns about the modern worldand its perspective with those of social philosopher Max Weber in “IronCrown, Iron Cage: Tolkien and Weber on Modernity and Enchantment.” Curry claims that the two writers’ “diagnoses of modernity . . .were tantalizingly similar” (99), stating that the heart of this similaritylies in their conceptions of magic and enchantment. Curry says that, forTolkien, “the hallmark of magic is will, whereas that of enchantmentis wonder” (100), concepts he also asserts to be intricately involved inWeber’s analysis of modern society (101). XXXXXXXX essay is novel and establishes an unusual connection, but the argument itself lacks the clarity andlinearity that would make it compelling. XXXXXXXX central concepts of magicand enchantment, themselves a fascinating link between the two authors,280Book Reviewsget lost in digressions on the later impact of Weber on social theory ordiscussion of the various mythological and historical associations withthe mineral iron.In “A Mythology for England?: Looking a Gift Horse in the Mouth,”a wide-ranging and authoritative essay, Thomas Honegger outlines howTolkien attempts to place “his mythopoeic writings within a frameworkthat would allow him to dedicate it to England, his country” (110). Honegger begins from the well-known premise that Tolkien “bemoans thefact that his country lacks a genuinely English mythology” (110), andhe walks his readers clearly and compellingly through Tolkien’s earlywritings to show how Tolkien set out to fill this national mythologicalgap. XXXXXXXX “linking of Tolkien’s Legendarium with England,” Honeggerexplains, “is achieved predominantly, though not exclusively, by meansof the frame narratives” (116-7), whose central figures are pseudo-historical Anglo-Saxon men who encounter Elves and transmit the stories of Elvish legends. Moreover, in early versions of the Legendarium,Tolkien explicitly identifies Tol Eressëa with the British Isles themselves.Although Tolkien’s later writings moved away from these explicit ties between Elvenhome and England, Honegger argues that XXXXXXXX Lord of theRings remains mythologically tied to England through the literary activityof the hobbits, who capture “some of the best elements of ‘Englishness’”(126).In “Lewis’s View of Myth as a Conveyor of Deepest Truth,” DevinBrown argues that, despite Lewis’s numerous expositional writings, Lewisbelieved that fiction serves as a more powerful vehicle for spiritual truth,enabling him not merely to state, but to suggest (133). In his fiction, therefore, Lewis attempts to “express truth through a mythic format” (133).XXXXXXXX essay concludes with several pairs of long quotations, examples ofparticular spiritual ideas that Lewis has explored in both a fictional anda non-fictional setting. XXXXXXXX device is a happy one, although the largerargument about the nature of myth might have been more effectuallyfurthered by a more detailed analysis of the passages thus juxtaposed.Miryam Librán-Moreno’s essay, “‘A Kind of Orpheus-Legend in Reverse’: Two Classical Myths in the Story of Beren and Lúthien,” containsa remarkably thorough catalogue of similar elements in Tolkien’s storyof Beren and Lúthien as it evolved through the years in which Tolkiendeveloped it and in many different Greek and Latin versions of the mythsof Orpheus and Eurydice and Protesilaus and Laodameia. Librán-Moreno’s establishment of the Protesilaus and Laodameia connection in addition to the more common link to Orpheus is an intriguing one, but theessay on the whole contains very little direct discussion of Tolkien’s story,and concludes only that these two myths exerted “an influence on Tolkien’s own idiosyncratic material” (182). XXXXXXXX essay demonstrates extensive281Book Reviewsresearch, yet to this reviewer it illustrates the impulse that Tolkien cautioned against in his “soup” metaphor in his essay “On Fairy-stories”:the impulse to look past the soup itself, the “story as it is served up by itsauthor,” in a desire to discover the “bones of the ox out of which it hasbeen boiled,” the story’s “sources or material” (MC 120).In “A Monster that Matters: Tolkien’s Grendel Revisited,” EugenioOlivares-Merino sets out to “provide a systematic description of howTolkien conceived Grendel, the hero’s first foe in the Anglo-Saxon poemBeowulf” (187). XXXXXXXX essay provides, at great length, a summary and discussion of Tolkien’s argument about Grendel in his great essay “Beowulf:XXXXXXXX Monsters and the Critics,” as well as an interesting discussion ofBeowulf and its critical reception prior to Tolkien’s seminal essay. Olivares-Merino’s essay, though quite readable, seems rather out of place inthis collection, as it does not explicitly engage any of the central themesof the book. He remarks at the end of the essay: “I assume that muchcould be said about the relevance of Grendel behind some of the creatures in XXXXXXXX Hobbit or XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,” but no such discussion follows,nor any treatment of the implications that Tolkien’s literary analysis ofBeowulf and its monsters may have for his concept of myth or of storytelling. XXXXXXXX essay raises many questions, but posits few answers.“A Tale as Old as Time, Freshly Told Anew: Love and Sacrifice inTolkien, Lewis and Rowling” by Margarita Carretero-González examines the “centrality of love and sacrifice” in the works of Tolkien, C. S.Lewis, and J. K. Rowling (247). Carretero-González focuses on a comparison between the magical effects of Lily Potter’s sacrifice of her life toprotect her son Harry in Rowling’s books, of Aslan’s sacrifice to redeemthe life of Edmund in Lewis’s XXXXXXXX Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe, and ofGandalf ’s sacrifice on the Bridge of Khazad-dûm in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings.XXXXXXXX treatment of each author is rather brief and glancing, though theessay dwells somewhat longer on the reception of J. K. Rowling and theappropriateness of her inclusion in a conversation on the Inklings.XXXXXXXX next chapter is “XXXXXXXX Hidden Meanings of the Name ‘Ransom’:Strange Philology and ‘Contradiction’ in C.S. Lewis’s Cosmic Trilogy”by Fernando Soto and Marta Garcia de la Puerta. This essay’s centralconcern, a philological investigation of the name of Ransom, the protagonist of C.S. Lewis’s space trilogy, seems an appropriate undertaking. XXXXXXXX conclusion to which the authors are led by this analysis—thatRansom is “a Christlike figure”—seems unobjectionable, though theirsupposition that Ransom’s title of Director in That Hideous Strength is intended to mask or remove Ransom’s “redeemer persona” is unconvincing (282). Not content to analyze what Lewis actually wrote, the authorsinstead premise much of their argument on what they wish Lewis hadsaid, but did not. Soto and Garcia de la Puerta allude to the fictitious282Book Reviewsetymology that Lewis gives for Ransom’s name in Perelandra, explaining that it derives from “Ranolf ’s son” (270), but they opine that Lewis“might have been more linguistically consistent” if he had named the ancestor “Ramolf ” instead (270). If Lewis had done this, they suggest, thenRansom’s name would not be Ransom but Ram-son, which would connect “Ransom/Ramson” (as they proceed to refer to him) with a lamb,and therefore Christ.In “‘As Under a Green Sea’: Visions of War in the Dead Marshes,”John Garth argues that in the chapter “XXXXXXXX Passage of the Marshes”in Book IV of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, we can perceive Tolkien’s “expressive powers quickened again by memories of the First World War, seenthrough the prism of the Second” (311). This essay sifts very carefully through the evidence of Tolkien’s letters, both those expressing histhoughts during World War II, while he was writing Book IV, and thosecontaining his memories and reflections on his harrowing personal experiences in the trenches in World War I. Garth does a remarkable job ofcombining this evidence with a close and sensitive reading of Tolkien’sdescriptions of the Dead Marshes, augmented by thoughtful and evocative comparisons of Tolkien’s imagery to that of other World War I writers. XXXXXXXX weakness of the essay is a tendency at times to lay on some ofTolkien’s phrases in his letters more weight than their context may easilysupport, but nevertheless the case that Garth makes in this essay is a verystrong and suggestive one.In the final chapter, “Leaf by Niggle and the Aesthetics of Gift: Towards a Definition of J.R.R. Tolkien’s Notion of Art” Eduardo Seguraconsiders the relationship between Tolkien’s understanding of human artand his Christian worldview. He begins with some audacity by challenging the uncritical way in which Tolkien’s oft-quoted dislike of allegoryis often accepted. In his rejection of allegory, Tolkien expresses preference for an alternative approach to the composition and reception ofstories: “history” and “applicability.” Segura argues that this preferenceis rooted in his understanding of the “relation between myth and truth”(316), a relationship that depends both on his Christian outlook and hisaesthetic theories. XXXXXXXX centerpiece of the essay is a reading of “Leaf byNiggle,” which Segura treats as a very personal reflection on both artisticand spiritual realities, in which Tolkien shows that human art as well asthe relation between myth and truth has, at its core, grace, the free giftof God. In the end, Segura argues, Tolkien shows that he sees art “as ameans to be redeemed, and to redeem others” (335).This collection is a noble undertaking, and it contains much learningand several very important and enlightening studies. XXXXXXXXre is no denying,however, that its contents are rather uneven—uneven in some superficialthough jarring ways, such as the length of the chapters: one essay is over283Book Reviewsfive times the length of one of its near neighbors. More importantly, theessays vary significantly in how fully they engage with the fascinating central concerns of the collection. Some essays engage Lewis and Tolkien’snotions of myth and art very directly and very fruitfully. Others are onlyconnected to this central theme tangentially, and some seem disinclinedto engage the primary concepts involved in the discussion.XXXXXXXX collection, therefore, leaves a sense of disappointment that mayrecall Gimli’s sober assessment of human endeavors: “It is ever so withthe things that Men begin: there is a frost in Spring or a blight in Summer, and they fail of their promise” (RK, V, ix, 149). Perhaps, however,we can join Legolas in recalling that “seldom do they fail of their seed,”and hope that this collection will stimulate much further discussion onthis important subject.COREY OLSENWASHINGTON COLLEGECHESTERTOWN, MARYLANDXXXXXXXX Silmarillion: Thirty Years On, edited by Allan Turner. Zollikofen: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. [4], iv, 168 pp. $17.00 / £8.30 (trade paperback) ISBN 9783905703108. Cormarë Series no. 15.Has it really been more than three decades since XXXXXXXX Silmarillion landed in bookstores to the bewilderment of some and the delight of others?A lot of water has flowed under the bridge to Nargothrond since then,giving us new perspective on Christopher Tolkien’s first attempt to publish a portion of his father’s sprawling legacy.With the multi-volume History of Middle-earth now behind us, shallwe consider XXXXXXXX Silmarillion simply as a piece of literature in the Tolkiencanon or can we still continue to use it as resource for study? Both, Ithink. Although I’ve read XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings many times, I’ve alwayspreferred XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, embracing it first as a work of art and onlylater as a resource to be mined for knowledge of Tolkien’s legendarium.And I still find myself returning to it for study, because there are passagesand precise turns of phrase that occur nowhere else in the vast archive ofmaterial published by Tolkien’s son Christopher.As XXXXXXXX Silmarillion: Thirty Years On ably demonstrates, there is stillmuch to be gleaned from that early presentation of Middle-earth mythology and legend. Allan Turner’s well-balanced and thoughtful collection of essays chosen to commemorate the thirty-year publication anniversary of XXXXXXXX Silmarillion is a welcome addition to Tolkien scholarship.XXXXXXXX volume is slim at 176 pages, but the depth and breadth of thoughtencompassed in these essays makes it well worth owning. Topics range283Book Reviewsfive times the length of one of its near neighbors. More importantly, theessays vary significantly in how fully they engage with the fascinating central concerns of the collection. Some essays engage Lewis and Tolkien’snotions of myth and art very directly and very fruitfully. Others are onlyconnected to this central theme tangentially, and some seem disinclinedto engage the primary concepts involved in the discussion.XXXXXXXX collection, therefore, leaves a sense of disappointment that mayrecall Gimli’s sober assessment of human endeavors: “It is ever so withthe things that Men begin: there is a frost in Spring or a blight in Summer, and they fail of their promise” (RK, V, ix, 149). Perhaps, however,we can join Legolas in recalling that “seldom do they fail of their seed,”and hope that this collection will stimulate much further discussion onthis important subject.COREY OLSENWASHINGTON COLLEGECHESTERTOWN, MARYLANDXXXXXXXX Silmarillion: Thirty Years On, edited by Allan Turner. Zollikofen: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. [4], iv, 168 pp. $17.00 / £8.30 (trade paperback) ISBN 9783905703108. Cormarë Series no. 15.Has it really been more than three decades since XXXXXXXX Silmarillion landed in bookstores to the bewilderment of some and the delight of others?A lot of water has flowed under the bridge to Nargothrond since then,giving us new perspective on Christopher Tolkien’s first attempt to publish a portion of his father’s sprawling legacy.With the multi-volume History of Middle-earth now behind us, shallwe consider XXXXXXXX Silmarillion simply as a piece of literature in the Tolkiencanon or can we still continue to use it as resource for study? Both, Ithink. Although I’ve read XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings many times, I’ve alwayspreferred XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, embracing it first as a work of art and onlylater as a resource to be mined for knowledge of Tolkien’s legendarium.And I still find myself returning to it for study, because there are passagesand precise turns of phrase that occur nowhere else in the vast archive ofmaterial published by Tolkien’s son Christopher.As XXXXXXXX Silmarillion: Thirty Years On ably demonstrates, there is stillmuch to be gleaned from that early presentation of Middle-earth mythology and legend. Allan Turner’s well-balanced and thoughtful collection of essays chosen to commemorate the thirty-year publication anniversary of XXXXXXXX Silmarillion is a welcome addition to Tolkien scholarship.XXXXXXXX volume is slim at 176 pages, but the depth and breadth of thoughtencompassed in these essays makes it well worth owning. Topics range284Book Reviewsfrom Northernness to eucatastrophe, from mythopoeia to narratology,from nostalgia to theologisation, all displaying unique, carefully argued,and sometimes contrasting points of view.XXXXXXXX collection begins with Rhona Beare’s “A Mythology for England,” bringing XXXXXXXX Silmarillion commentary full circle, so to speak, forit was she who queried Tolkien about XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings via letters in1958 and the early 60s with persistent questions of the detailed, nit-picking type that many authors dread and never answer—“What were thecolours of the two wizards mentioned but not named in the book?” “Didthe Witch-king ride a pterodactyl at the siege of Gondor?” (Letter 211, inLetters). Luckily for us, Tolkien answered her candidly and at some lengthon many topics, adding immensely to our understanding of his conception of Middle-earth. Some forty years later, Beare published a pamphlettitled J.R.R. Tolkien’s “XXXXXXXX Silmarillion” (New Lambton, Australia: NimrodPublications, 1999), which I recall reading with some distaste becauseof its study-guide style. Happily, the section from that guide reworkedfor this new collection of criticism is much improved, incorporating aconnection between Eärendil and the Bickling Homilies into her discussion of the “North-western temper and temperature” toward which thelegendarium is slanted.Beare’s analysis of “northern” and “southern” myths and legendsas the product of climate and landscape—the “warm dry climate ofGreece” vs. the “cool, cloudy, misty and damp” environs of Englandand the Celtic lands—remains sound, as does her discussion of Tolkien’sdebt to Beowulf. All this is common knowledge for most readers of XXXXXXXXSilmarillion. XXXXXXXX transition from Northern “race-memory” of sea-faringpeoples to Tolkien’s recurring dream of Atlantis and the way in which itsurfaces in the Akallabêth is of more interest, but Beare’s added insightinto the possible derivation of Eärendil is where her essay provides newavenues of thought for the curious. “Myths leave traces on language”(20), she explains, and for Tolkien, this meant looking for clues in OldEnglish. Following traditional usage for earendel, “Eärendil” is both nameand noun, both hero and the Morning Star. Beare’s thoughtful discussionof traces in both Crist and the Homilies is well-supported with numerousexamples, making this the highlight of the essay.A more difficult read is Anna Slack’s “Moving Mandos: XXXXXXXX Dynamics of Subcreation in ‘Of Beren and Lúthien’.” Slack’s premise—thatTolkien’s theory of eucatastrophe can be traced through song and oathin this great tale from XXXXXXXX Silmarillion —is a valid topic of inquiry with aninteresting, unique approach. XXXXXXXX article suffers, however, from a vagueness and turgidity of language that might discourage less determinedreaders. Slack’s tendency to quality her points by piling on multiple prepositional phrases where just one would do is only part of the problem:285Book Reviews“XXXXXXXX dynamics of subcreation, or the relations between and effects ofperformative utterances on and in the historical and eternal worlds, areset out at length by Tolkien in ‘On Fairy Stories’, where these dynamicshighlight the contrasting natures of eucatastrophe and dyscatastrophe”(60). Ambiguous word choice and misplaced modifiers add to the confusion. For example, in discussing Lúthien’s association with the eternal,Slack writes, “As well as being undeniably the most beautiful of Ilúvatar’schildren, the narrator here represents in the secondary world (the account we are reading) a historical figure who is undoubtedly an embodiment of the eternal” (70). Obviously, it is Lúthien who is most beautifuland not the narrator, but such constructions impede the flow of the argument, especially when it is unclear whether the word represents should beread as “presents” or “stands for.”Writing style aside, Slack’s argument for Tolkien’s use of oath andsong to invoke eucatastrophe is a fertile topic for which ample evidencecan be found. XXXXXXXX first part of the essay establishes the groundwork forher theory, presenting what Slack terms the two textual modes of the“Beowulf Syndrome” (dyscatastrophe or tragic outcome) counterbalanced by the “Eagle Effect” (eucatastrophic outcome). “For the eucatastrophic to be a credible and effective device,” Slack explains, “there hadalso to be dyscatastrophe” (62). Once this concept of balance in the eternal world is laid out, with evidence from the “Ainulindalë,” Slack appliesit in the second part of her essay to the archetypal tale of Beren andLúthien. Here the concepts of oath-taking and song-making as agents ofboth types of modes are presented, in which oaths are strongly associatedwith the negative aspects of Melkor, and songs are “agents of eucatastrophe.” As Slack points out, the “power of the oath is in its ability to bindthe speaker, and the great danger in oaths is in breaking them” (68). Forexample, the conflicting oaths of Thingol and Beren bind them both tothe curse of the Silmarils. In counterbalance, we have “song as a subcreative act” that brings joy and a glimpse of the eternal, however briefand fleeting, in a world chilled by Melkor’s presence. Lúthien’s legacy toMiddle-earth, asserts Slack, is this power of song to instill hope in eventhe smallest of hearts, in the darkest of places.Next up is Michaël Devaux’s textual study, “XXXXXXXX Origins of the Ainulindalë: XXXXXXXX Present State of Research,” translated from its originalFrench to English by editor Allan Turner. XXXXXXXX article’s first premise—toidentify trends in interpretation—required comparison of earliest to latest versions of Ainulindalë according to the texts published in ChristopherTolkien’s History of Middle-earth series. Sorting out the versions of authority relied on by various essays focusing on Tolkien’s creation myth isessential, Devaux asserts, in distinguishing “elements of Christianity andthose of the Northern matter for any given period” (82). Devaux includes286Book Reviewstwo chronological charts that graphically demonstrate the evidence ofTolkien’s relentless urge to revise.Basing the structure of the second part of his essay on Tolkien’s fivestages of creation as revealed in the “Ainulindalë,” Devaux discusses howthese stages—Creation of the Ainur, Communication of Eru’s Designto the Ainur, the Great Music (theme and variations), the Vision of Eru,and the Achievement or Realization of the vision—relate to Tolkien’sCatholicism. In other words, he undertakes to establish the degree towhich “theologisation” of the legendarium can be charted through thevarious versions of Tolkien’s creation myth. In the earliest version (fromXXXXXXXX Book of Lost Tales), for example, there is no “Eä!” or equivalent of theWord of God that causes things to be, which suggests a more Northernmythological outlook. Only in subsequent versions does the Christianconcept of a “creation” become evident. And what are we to make of thevarious versions of the “divine song” through which the Ainur and theworld are sung into existence? Devaux’s insightful and meticulous discussion of the roles played by the Creator and his sub-creators (the Ainur)through Tolkien’s endless revisions provides the real meat of this essay.Of special interest to me as a reviewer is Jason Fisher’s article, “FromMythopoeia to Mythography: Tolkien, Lönnrot, and Jerome,” because itreflects in some degree my own study of the Kalevala’s influence on Tolkien. Fisher’s essay focuses first on the similarities of content and language(epic themes and linguistic borrowings) found in the Finnish nationalepic, Kalevala, and XXXXXXXX Silmarillion—the “Mythopoeia” section of the article. He then points out that in style, these two works are quite different.XXXXXXXX style of XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, as many have said, could be better describedas biblical, which provides Fisher a segue into his extended discussion ofthe Bible’s influence (in particular the Latin Vulgate) on Tolkien’s work.Says Fisher, these contact points “between the Bible and XXXXXXXX Silmarillion,we will see, extend beyond the purely stylistic and into the domain ofcontent and theological influence as well” (123).In the “Mythography” segment of his essay, Fisher concentrates onChristopher Tolkien’s role as literary executor for his father’s vast andsprawling creative output. Having convincingly established the resonances of both the Kalevala and the Vulgate within XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, Fisher takesan in-depth look at the ways in which Christopher Tolkien’s handing ofhis father’s legendarium resembles the work done by the compilers/editors of those influential works, namely, Elias Lönnrot and St. Jerome. Inclear, logical prose, Fisher explains the major focus of his study: whereas“J.R.R. Tolkien may have been emulating the product of Lönnrot’s andJerome’s efforts, Christopher Tolkien was emulating the process” (127).Of particular significance is Fisher’s discussion of Christopher’s editorialchoices—and changes—that produced the 1977 volume. Fisher suggests287Book Reviewsthat Christopher Tolkien, with assistance from Guy Kay, added morethan mere compilation expertise in creating the Silmarillion manuscript,in particular, the section titled “XXXXXXXX Ruin of Doriath.” Whether sucheditorial liberties enhance or detract from the final outcome remainsdebatable, but there can be no question, according to Fisher, that “thepublished Silmarillion more accurately represents a daunting complex ofchoices” (135) that reveal as much about Christopher Tolkien as the endless revisions do about his father.Nils Agøy’s essay, “Viewpoints, Audiences and Lost Texts in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion,” addresses a problem I recall experiencing the first time I readthe book: from whose point-of-view is it told? It took me some time to adjust to just reading the stories for their own sake and not worrying aboutwhose handed-down text each tale might purport to be. As it turns out,this very dilemma comprises Agøy’s fascinating discussion of the possibleapproaches to viewpoint in XXXXXXXX Silmarillion.XXXXXXXX problem of shifting viewpoint, Agøy suggests, is implicit in thefact that what lends Tolkien’s Middle-earth its sense of authority is thefrequent reference to and reliance on “lost texts” of the Edain and Eldar.This problem is compounded by the fact that “for the great majority ofTolkien readers, [the 1977 Silmarillion] is the standard, authoritative sourceof ‘information’ about the Elder Days” (141). Agøy convincingly arguesthat the question of provenance is at the heart of the problem—whereasearlier versions of the “Silmarillion” material contain some statementof their supposed authorship or attribution (Rúmil, Eriol, Ælfwine, orsomeone else), no such explicit framework was created for XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, hence many readers’ sense of confusion when confronted with the“Ainulindalë,” “Valaquenta,” and “Quenta Silmarillion,” “Akallabêth,”and “Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age.”Agøy tackles the difficult question of general approach as well—arethe tales told from a “Mannish” perspective or from an Elvish viewpoint?As Agøy demonstrates, Tolkien himself struggled with the problem ofviewpoint and provenance, ultimately discarding “both Ælfwine and thenotion that the ‘Silmarillion’ material was almost purely Elvish” (161)because he was unable to reconcile the text’s inaccurate astronomicalconcepts with twentieth-century facts. Agøy’s conclusion, that the “losttext” approach does not work for XXXXXXXX Silmarillion and that it should beread “without trying to place it with Ælfwine or Bilbo or Pengolod orRúmil or Númenórean or Gondorian loremasters” (161), makes perfectsense.I’ve saved Michael Drout’s revelatory essay, “Reflections on ThirtyYears of Reading XXXXXXXX Silmarillion,” for last because my reaction to it iscomplicated. Drout’s lucid, intelligent prose, free from academic jargonand unnecessarily convoluted syntax, is always a pleasure. XXXXXXXX fact that288Book Reviewshe chose to present a tight, cogent argument for nostalgia as an effectiveliterary technique and frame it within his own memoir is noteworthy—the fact that it works so well is even more remarkable.Reading this essay sent me back to my own “Silmarillion moment” in1977. Confined at home with a newborn and a raging case of post-partum blues, I embraced the lofty misery of XXXXXXXX Silmarillion with my heartand soul, devouring Tolkien’s majestic prose and weeping aloud at thetragic beauty of it all—the book was epic in the grandest way and hasremained so emotionally imprinted in my psyche that to this day I cannotread “Thus fell the High King of the Noldor; and they beat him into thedust with their maces, and his banner, blue and silver, they trod into themire of his blood” (S 194) without a lump in my throat.Drout’s understanding of how and why nostalgia works to create theoverwhelming sense of loss and longing that permeates XXXXXXXX Silmarillioncarries added weight when couched in his own experience of these emotions as a young reader. As he so aptly demonstrates, for each small ray oflight penetrating the unrelenting grief of the so-called “Great Tales,” adark result is waiting—what goes up must come down, sometimes muchfurther down. And yet, as unlikely as it seems, this experience of lossor embracing the knowledge that things will never be the same again isprecisely what Tolkien used to create high literature—in Drout’s words,“making loss and longing into art” (36).Drout’s discussion of Tolkien’s aesthetic technique approaches XXXXXXXXSilmarillion from two perspectives: the big picture (“the epic sweep ofdarkness and the heroic resistance to it”) and “the beautiful passages”down at the sentence level. Time and again, sweetness and light are tempered by the bitter darkness in the rise and fall of Tolkien’s diction—Drout’s example is a passage that stopped me in my tracks the first timeI read it, and it still does: “Thus King Finrod Felagund, fairest and mostbeloved of the house of Finwë, redeemed his oath; but Beren mournedbeside him in despair” (42). And as Drout explains, Tolkien’s transformative art takes this one step further and allows the despair to create asense of painful beauty: Finrod’s burial mound remains green and inviolate. Time and again throughout XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, Drout explains, weencounter the “but”—that “undercutting of the victory”—as well as the“and yet” which tempers the darkness with yellow flowers growing ona burial mound. When this “pattern of building and loss, triumph andfall, beauty and wreckage” that permeates XXXXXXXX Silmarillion gets under theskin, we are “ripe,” to use Drout’s term, for the “ache of nostalgia” (48).It is, Drout concludes, what seems to “lie beneath all of human history,”from personal, individual tragedies to the sweep of nations. Which goesa long way toward explaining why XXXXXXXX Silmarillion moves some of us theway it does.289Book ReviewsAs you can see, I’m very favorably impressed by the offerings ofXXXXXXXX Silmarillion: Thirty Years On. Its technical faults (another proofreadinground for typos would have been advised) are small, and its contributionsto Tolkien scholarship are considerable. Each of the authors in the volume has valuable ideas for readers to draw on and perhaps carry further.XXXXXXXX book confirms that, even after three decades, the importance ofChristopher Tolkien’s first attempt at bringing his father’s astonishingsubcreated world to light has not dimmed with the years.ANNE C. PETTYCRAWFORDVILLE, FLORIDATolkien, Race and Cultural History: From Fairies to Hobbits, by Dimitra Fimi.Basingstoke, Hampshire, and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009. xvi,240 pp. £50.00 / $85.00 (hardcover) ISBN 9780230219519.Tolkien, Race and Cultural History: From Fairies to Hobbits is the product ofDimitra Fimi’s extended academic interest in the development of Tolkien’s writings. Fimi is a lecturer at the University of Cardiff and has beenteaching courses on the professor’s work for several years. She has alsopublished various articles on Tolkien, some of which have been re-usedfor two of the chapters.XXXXXXXX basic approach of the study is biographical-historical. Fimi linksevents from the professor’s life and times with the growth and transformation of what is usually referred to as Tolkien’s legendarium. She establishes three main foci, which correspond to the three main parts of thebook: Part I discusses Tolkien’s concept of fairies/elves; Part II looks athis imaginary languages and his theory of language aesthetic; and PartIII analyses the effects that his published fiction (predominantly XXXXXXXX Hobbit) had on the further development of the legendarium.Fimi proceeds in all three parts in a similar manner. First she presentsthe relevant published (or accessible) material from Tolkien’s writingsand, to a lesser extent, also drawings and paintings. She then goes on todiscuss the contemporary opinions and theories on the topic and finallyworks out the relevance of these elements for the inception and furtherdevelopment of Tolkien’s work.XXXXXXXX discussion of fairies/elves starts with some of the early poems(e.g. “Wood-sunshine,” “Goblin Feet,” “Kortirion among the Trees,” “AnEvening in Tavrobel,”). XXXXXXXX fairies/elves (Tolkien predominantly usedthe term “fairy”) in these early pieces are still very much indebted to theVictorian and Edwardian folk-tradition, which presents them as spritesof diminutive size. XXXXXXXX discussion of the fairy tradition up to Tolkien’stime offers the reader a well-written and informative introduction to the289Book ReviewsAs you can see, I’m very favorably impressed by the offerings ofXXXXXXXX Silmarillion: Thirty Years On. Its technical faults (another proofreadinground for typos would have been advised) are small, and its contributionsto Tolkien scholarship are considerable. Each of the authors in the volume has valuable ideas for readers to draw on and perhaps carry further.XXXXXXXX book confirms that, even after three decades, the importance ofChristopher Tolkien’s first attempt at bringing his father’s astonishingsubcreated world to light has not dimmed with the years.ANNE C. PETTYCRAWFORDVILLE, FLORIDATolkien, Race and Cultural History: From Fairies to Hobbits, by Dimitra Fimi.Basingstoke, Hampshire, and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009. xvi,240 pp. £50.00 / $85.00 (hardcover) ISBN 9780230219519.Tolkien, Race and Cultural History: From Fairies to Hobbits is the product ofDimitra Fimi’s extended academic interest in the development of Tolkien’s writings. Fimi is a lecturer at the University of Cardiff and has beenteaching courses on the professor’s work for several years. She has alsopublished various articles on Tolkien, some of which have been re-usedfor two of the chapters.XXXXXXXX basic approach of the study is biographical-historical. Fimi linksevents from the professor’s life and times with the growth and transformation of what is usually referred to as Tolkien’s legendarium. She establishes three main foci, which correspond to the three main parts of thebook: Part I discusses Tolkien’s concept of fairies/elves; Part II looks athis imaginary languages and his theory of language aesthetic; and PartIII analyses the effects that his published fiction (predominantly XXXXXXXX Hobbit) had on the further development of the legendarium.Fimi proceeds in all three parts in a similar manner. First she presentsthe relevant published (or accessible) material from Tolkien’s writingsand, to a lesser extent, also drawings and paintings. She then goes on todiscuss the contemporary opinions and theories on the topic and finallyworks out the relevance of these elements for the inception and furtherdevelopment of Tolkien’s work.XXXXXXXX discussion of fairies/elves starts with some of the early poems(e.g. “Wood-sunshine,” “Goblin Feet,” “Kortirion among the Trees,” “AnEvening in Tavrobel,”). XXXXXXXX fairies/elves (Tolkien predominantly usedthe term “fairy”) in these early pieces are still very much indebted to theVictorian and Edwardian folk-tradition, which presents them as spritesof diminutive size. XXXXXXXX discussion of the fairy tradition up to Tolkien’stime offers the reader a well-written and informative introduction to the290Book Reviewspredominant concepts. Fimi traces the diminutive size of the fairies backto Shakespeare’s sprites that may constitute, next to Michael Drayton’screations, the major models for all the diminutive beings of later centuries. She deals with fairies in A Midsummer Night’s Dream and XXXXXXXX Tempestyet does not mention the Queen Mab sequence from Romeo and Juliet,which might be due to the fact that the main focus is on the Victorian andEdwardian depictions of fairies—in poetry as well as pictorial art anddrama. Modern readers are most likely familiar with the tiny Tinker Bell(from Peter Pan), a typical product of the “diminishing process” and moreor less contemporary with Tolkien’s early poems. Fimi also provides abrief overview of the rather confusing and confused terminology (goblin,fairy, sprite, elf, etc.), which is, to some extent, also reflected in Tolkien’searly work. Even the professor needed some time to work out the exactdifferences between the various categories of beings, and traces of theinitial “confusion” can be still found in XXXXXXXX Hobbit, where “goblin” and“orc” occur side by side as synonyms.XXXXXXXX material analyzed and the conclusions drawn in this section arecoherently and clearly presented albeit not really new. This is not Fimi’sfault but rather due to inaccessibility of the unpublished fiction and poetry. Some of the early material has been edited in the volumes of XXXXXXXXHistory of Middle-earth, yet the full text of “Wood-sunshine,” whichHumphrey Carpenter had obviously been able to read in its entirety, remains unpublished. Fimi, like any other reader, has to rely on the passages quoted in Carpenter’s biography. This state of affairs may not botherthose who use the new criticism method, i.e. who focus on the publishedtext of a work and interpret it without recourse to biographical or historical information. However, Fimi has explicitly chosen a different procedure and is thus hampered by these restrictions. Further potential pitfallsof such an approach become evident later on when she relies on the textof “On Fairy-stories” as published in XXXXXXXX Monsters and the Critics. VerlynFlieger and Douglas Anderson’s edition of the various drafts (publishedas Tolkien On Fairy-stories), which shows that some of the key concepts andideas were obviously not yet extant in the early versions, came out toolate for consideration. In the case of Fimi’s study, there is, luckily, no (oronly very little) damage done, yet such instances raise troubling questionsconcerning the textual status of the other essays used (“A Secret Vice,”one manuscript c. 1931, revisions c. 1951; “English and Welsh,” lecturegiven 1955, printed 1963, several drafts). XXXXXXXX manuscripts and drafts ofthese essays are, together with additional notes, available at the Bodleian,but no critical editions exist as yet. As a consequence, scholars must becareful when discussing the possible influence of these “theoretical” textsin their published versions on Tolkien’s (earlier) fictional writings.At the end of the discussion of fairies in Victorian and Edwardian291Book Reviewstimes, the reader cannot but agree with Fimi’s convincingly argued andillustrated conclusion that Tolkien’s early writings are “‘in character’when viewed within the context of the Victorian and Edwardian fascination with fairies” (39). Her survey of the late nineteenth and earlytwentieth century traditions concerning fairies constitutes an importantcontribution to Tolkien studies. Previously the focus had been mainly onthe medieval inspirations for the “later” elves (e.g., by Tom Shippey), anda full and coherent study of the more or less contemporary context hadbeen missing.XXXXXXXX development of Tolkienian fairies away from the contemporary“sprites with antennae” towards the more grandiose concept of “heroicelves” is the topic of her next chapter. Fimi identifies three points ofinterest that are responsible for shaping the future elves: 1) the metaphysical question as to how the fairies/elves are part of God’s creation,2) the idea of making them the link between the ancient lost mythologyof England and contemporary folklore, and 3) the decision to establishthem as the speakers of Qenya. XXXXXXXX information made available in XXXXXXXXHistory of Middle-earth provides the basis for this knowledgeably arguedchapter, yet Fimi also takes into consideration some of the non-legendarium works such as XXXXXXXX Father Christmas Letters to further strengthen herargument. As she is able to illustrate convincingly, it is mainly the creativetension between the fairies as part of a lost “mythology of England” onthe one hand, and their metaphysical status as part of God’s creation onthe other, that is responsible for the further development of the legendarium.XXXXXXXX second part of the book, comprising chapters five to seven, discusses Tolkien’s linguistic work, i.e. his invented languages as well as histheories of “phonetic fitness” and “linguistic aesthetic.” Fimi starts withan important observation: basic elements of Tolkien’s legendarium hadbeen in existence before or independent of Qenya—and challenges allwho have too readily given credence to Tolkien’s famous (though certainly somewhat exaggerated) characterisation of his literary work asbeing “linguistic in inspiration.” Basing her analysis mainly on the twolectures “English and Welsh” and “A Secret Vice,” Fimi then summarisesTolkien’s ideas on language and aesthetics and succinctly outlines themain linguistic theories on this topic. Attention is also paid to such artistic-literary movements as Dadaism and Velimir Khlebnikov’s soundsymbolic language “zaum.” Again, it becomes clear that Tolkien was notso much an erratic (and heretic) block in the linguistic landscape, butthat he rather belonged to a strong minority group of dissenters (suchas Edward Sapir and Otto Jespersen) who were, to varying degrees, opposed to the reigning Saussurean paradigm. Tolkien’s attempts at creating alphabets for his invented languages (be they runic or otherwise) also292Book Reviewsreflect contemporary (and much older) efforts at spelling-reforms and thecreation of “ideal” alphabets that would re-establish a one-to-one correspondence between letter/symbol and sound. Fimi’s discussion of thisrather specialized topic is always clear and dispenses with any unnecessary jargon. It is one of the strengths of this book that the author is ableto combine the work of specialists in the relevant fields (e.g. UmbertoEco, Olga Pombo or Marina Yaguello in matters of invented “ideal”languages) with that of Tolkien scholars and her own ideas. XXXXXXXX resultis a study with academic qualities yet which can be also enjoyed by thegeneral reader.XXXXXXXXre is, however, a gap in Fimi’s coverage of the relevant secondaryliterature on this very topic—which is to be blamed on the lengthy production process in publishing her work. Many of the topics Fimi coversin this chapter on “linguistic aesthetic” have also been discussed by RossSmith—first in his article ‘Fitting Sense to Sound: Linguistic Aesthetics and Phonosemantics in the Work of J.R.R. Tolkien’ (Tolkien Studies 3,2006) and more significantly in his book Inside Language: Linguistic and Aesthetic XXXXXXXXory in Tolkien (2007). Fimi’s typescript had been submitted beforeSmith’s book was published and it was not possible to alter the chapterin question. (On the strong and weak points of Smith’s study, see JasonFisher’s thorough review in Mythlore 103/104, and also Fimi’s own review of the book in Tolkien Studies 5.) Fimi will wish to take into consideration Smith’s ideas in a future edition of her study (where the inevitableremaining typos, etc., may also be cleaned up for good). Maybe, too,some of the out-of-the way (yet topical) publications can be considered,such as Alex Lewis and Elizabeth Currie’s XXXXXXXX Uncharted Realms of Tolkien(2002) on the contemporary influences on Tolkien, or relevant articles inforeign languages, such as Dieter Bachmann and Thomas Honegger onrace, blood and hereditary memory, or Laurent Alibert’s application ofGeorges Dumézil’s theory of the three Indo-European estates onto someof Tolkien’s categorisations of people (Tolkien knew Dumézil and hiswork). Yet these latter items are desiderata of a specialist and their absence in the present work is of no relevance for Fimi’s overall argumentor the value of her study for the general reader.XXXXXXXX third and final part of the book, then, discusses the impact ofTolkien’s publication of his literary fiction (especially XXXXXXXX Hobbit) on thefurther development of his legendarium. Tolkien’s efforts to harmonisethe various parts of his creative work (language invention, literary fiction, mythological writings) have been discussed by scholars before Fimi;however, she is, to my knowledge, the first to stress the great importanceof the fact that, with the publication of XXXXXXXX Hobbit in 1937, a fixed pointexisted. XXXXXXXX fluid and changing matter of the legendarium now has tobe brought into accordance with the narrative fiction of XXXXXXXX Hobbit and,293Book Reviewslater on, XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, and the novelistic style of the latter heraldsthe transition from the mythological to a historical discourse. This newfocus on history brings to the fore questions concerning the origin ofMen, their subdivisions and racial specification. Fimi again offers a veryhelpful exploration of contemporary theories on race (and, incidentally,on language) and on Tolkien’s position—as far as it can be establishedwith certainty. Here, the biographical-historical approach of the bookshows its strength to the full. Instead of an anachronistic, post-modern,post-WW II evaluation, Fimi gives a balanced and valuable presentationof Tolkien’s position(s) from within the spirit of the time, so to speak. Shealso shows how contemporary events find their repercussions in Tolkien’sattempts to link the “pre-historic” cultures of, for example, Númenor,Gondor and Rohan, to historical models—and the problems and complications that such an attempt created.Fimi’s study is well worth reading for the specialist as well as (or evenmore so) for the general reader. XXXXXXXX author brings together (often for thefirst time) relevant research from cultural history and lays out her arguments fair and square. XXXXXXXX Tolkien scholar may miss some of the moreexotic publications on some of the topics discussed, but this can be seenas part of the overall strength of the book: it keeps to the middle roadof academia and does not loses itself in a wild-goose chase for comprehensiveness, nor does it try to push any monomythic interpretation ofTolkien’s work. Fimi’s approach is subtler, and yet it forces us to reconsider some well-beloved clichés. Thus, it will no longer be possible to talknaïvely about the linguistic inspiration of Tolkien’s fiction without adding at least some qualifying remarks. Whether Tolkien really intendedto use his (artistically and commercially) successful literary output as apost festum justification of his work on invented languages may have tobe investigated further—Fimi’s book has given us some answers but hasalso opened up some avenues for future research. What more can we askfor?THOMAS HONEGGERFRIEDRICH-SCHILLER-UNIVERSITÄTJENA, GERMANYWORKS CITEDAlibert, Laurent. “L’influence indo-européenne en Arda et ses limites”in Tolkien, Trente Ans Après (1973-2003) (2004), ed. Vincent Ferré:117-136.Bachmann, Dieter, and Thomas Honegger. “Ein Mythos für das 20.Jahrhundert: Blut, Rasse und Erbgedächtnis bei Tolkien,” HitherShore 2 (2005): 13-39.294Book ReviewsFimi, Dimitra. [book review, Inside Language (2007) by Ross Smith], TolkienStudies 5 (2008): 229-233.Fisher, Jason. [book review, Inside Language (2007) by Ross Smith], Mythlore27 no. 1/2 (whole no. 103/104; Fall/Winter 2008): 172-176.Tolkien’s “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings”: Sources of Inspiration, edited by StratfordCaldecott and Thomas Honegger. Zurich and Jena: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. [vi], 242 pp. $25.00 / £12.60 (trade paperback) ISBN9783905703122. Cormarë Series No. 18.In the Foreword to the Second Edition of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, J.R.R.Tolkien attempted, emphatically and ultimately unsuccessfully, to shapethe reception of his masterpiece and, in so doing, to mute discussion ofits motive, meaning, and sources. In his now-famous words: “I shouldlike to say something here with reference to the many opinions or guessesthat I have received or have read concerning the motives and meaning ofthe tale. XXXXXXXX prime motive was the desire of a tale-teller to try his handat a really long story that would hold the attention of readers, amusethem, delight them, and at times maybe excite them or deeply movethem. . . . As for any inner meaning or ‘message’, it has in the intentionof the author none. It is neither allegorical nor topical. . . . Its sources arethings long before in mind, or in some cases already written . . . ” (FR,Foreword, 6).That the author was unconvincing and unsuccessful in this attempt isno surprise. XXXXXXXX result of this failure, we know, has been the developmentof scholarship on Tolkien. Stratford Caldecott and Thomas Honegger’scollection contributes to a growing scholarly tradition and thereby participates in a larger shaping of the critical appreciation of, and exegeticalapproaches to, XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings. Many of these ten essays result froma Tolkien Studies conference held in 2006 at Exeter College, Oxford.Caldecott, in his Introduction, characterizes the conference as a sign of“the ‘coming of age’ of Tolkien Studies” (5) and finds significance inthe fact that it was held at Tolkien’s former college at the initiative ofthe Rector, Frances Cairncross. Completing the circuit from Tolkien’sstudent days to the current day is indeed noteworthy. Especially whenviewed against the backdrop of the political, social, and economic realities of the intellectual and collegiate world, the imprimatur of Exeter ona Tolkien conference does in fact signify a milestone for the field.XXXXXXXX evolution of critical appreciation for Tolkien that Caldecottsketches is significant in the current moment. Indeed, a new generationof literary critics is focused on Tolkien; the learning and scholarship294Book ReviewsFimi, Dimitra. [book review, Inside Language (2007) by Ross Smith], TolkienStudies 5 (2008): 229-233.Fisher, Jason. [book review, Inside Language (2007) by Ross Smith], Mythlore27 no. 1/2 (whole no. 103/104; Fall/Winter 2008): 172-176.Tolkien’s “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings”: Sources of Inspiration, edited by StratfordCaldecott and Thomas Honegger. Zurich and Jena: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. [vi], 242 pp. $25.00 / £12.60 (trade paperback) ISBN9783905703122. Cormarë Series No. 18.In the Foreword to the Second Edition of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, J.R.R.Tolkien attempted, emphatically and ultimately unsuccessfully, to shapethe reception of his masterpiece and, in so doing, to mute discussion ofits motive, meaning, and sources. In his now-famous words: “I shouldlike to say something here with reference to the many opinions or guessesthat I have received or have read concerning the motives and meaning ofthe tale. XXXXXXXX prime motive was the desire of a tale-teller to try his handat a really long story that would hold the attention of readers, amusethem, delight them, and at times maybe excite them or deeply movethem. . . . As for any inner meaning or ‘message’, it has in the intentionof the author none. It is neither allegorical nor topical. . . . Its sources arethings long before in mind, or in some cases already written . . . ” (FR,Foreword, 6).That the author was unconvincing and unsuccessful in this attempt isno surprise. XXXXXXXX result of this failure, we know, has been the developmentof scholarship on Tolkien. Stratford Caldecott and Thomas Honegger’scollection contributes to a growing scholarly tradition and thereby participates in a larger shaping of the critical appreciation of, and exegeticalapproaches to, XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings. Many of these ten essays result froma Tolkien Studies conference held in 2006 at Exeter College, Oxford.Caldecott, in his Introduction, characterizes the conference as a sign of“the ‘coming of age’ of Tolkien Studies” (5) and finds significance inthe fact that it was held at Tolkien’s former college at the initiative ofthe Rector, Frances Cairncross. Completing the circuit from Tolkien’sstudent days to the current day is indeed noteworthy. Especially whenviewed against the backdrop of the political, social, and economic realities of the intellectual and collegiate world, the imprimatur of Exeter ona Tolkien conference does in fact signify a milestone for the field.XXXXXXXX evolution of critical appreciation for Tolkien that Caldecottsketches is significant in the current moment. Indeed, a new generationof literary critics is focused on Tolkien; the learning and scholarship295Book Reviewsunderlying Tolkien’s project is generally acknowledged; the journal inwhich this review appears bears the scholarly stamp of a university press.A number of very high-quality scholarly publications on Tolkien haveappeared over the course of the last two decades and more; among thebest of these have been produced by the editors and contributors to thisvery journal. Still, it may be early to claim a coming of age. Such publications could be more common; and the list of scholars could be longer.Taking these latter factors into account, it is fair to say that the field is established but that it remains nascent. Only time will tell if it will blossomand endure. XXXXXXXXre are good reasons to be optimistic, of course. XXXXXXXX fieldhas excellent material to work with and a strong base of scholars; still, ithas its limits and weaknesses both foreseeable and unforeseen.Some of these limits and weaknesses are present in this volume,and they make themselves apparent in subtle ways from the cover art,through some of the essays, and on to the final credits. In general, I believe they arise from and contribute to an unresolved tension in the field:Many of us—most of us? all of us?—came to Tolkien Studies becausehis work succeeded exactly as the author intended. It held our attention,it amused us, delighted us, and at times maybe excited or deeply movedus. Hence the question, and the tension: is it possible to bracket this kindof affection for the work and the author and, from there, to apply thekind of dispassionate critical perspective to his text that the norms ofscholarship require? If it is possible, one might further ask, is it desirable? Is it beneficial? Is it even necessary? I am not sure of the answerto these questions. One answer, my own, is that, unless this kind of affection intrudes on one’s willingness to critique Tolkien and to critiqueother scholars of Tolkien, it should be considered beneficial. Scholarshipinfused by passion for the subject is a good thing. At its best, that is whatI believe Tolkien Studies can be and ought to be. But it needs to get pasta few things. Scholars need to get past being worried about studying andenjoying a work that other critics have frankly not enjoyed and have chosennot to study. XXXXXXXXy need to get past concerns about self-legitimacy, pastthe very kinds of anxieties that one discerns in expressions related to thefield’s status, such as Caldecott’s comment on its “coming of age.”In brief, the field needs to focus on the serious work of scholarshipitself, for it is the quality of the scholarship that will be most convincingover time. Tolkien Studies needs to continue to demonstrate that it doesas other fields do: it situates its subject; creates and disseminates newknowledge; reinforces and affirms foundational knowledge; shares conflicting opinions; challenges assumptions and develops new ones; seeksout new critical perspectives and approaches; inspires future research directions; and broadens the impact of critical discoveries. If scholarship inany field does not do these things, then it risks becoming the monotonous296Book Reviewsdomain of the already converted, and thus meaningless and inconsequential to those beyond the inner circle. To its credit, this volume doescontain a number of very powerful essays. XXXXXXXXy advance our knowledge,reinforce foundational information, situate Tolkien historically and intellectually, provide new critical approaches to his texts and inspire newdirections. XXXXXXXX book also contains some arguably inconsequential essays,and, at times, struggles to make the connection between the promise ofits title—sources of inspiration—and its full content.XXXXXXXX volume is divided into three sections: Part One—Biographical;Part Two—Mythos and Modernity; and, Part Three—Mythos and Logos. XXXXXXXX first part is clearly the strongest of the three. It contains excellent essays by John Garth and Verlyn Flieger and an enlightening entryby Peter Gilliver, Edmund Weiner, and Jeremy Marshall, all editors onthe Oxford English Dictionary. Garth’s essay, “Tolkien, Exeter College, andthe Great War,” satisfyingly extends and amplifies knowledge and insights from his very fine book, Tolkien and the Great War (2003). Readers ofthis piece will enjoy a kind of insider’s view on Tolkien’s time at Exeter,one that is infused by intimacy and buttressed by detail, depth, and documentation. It will not surprise anyone that Tolkien enjoyed company andlanguage. He did not, however, possess or practice habits associated withthe best student. He founded a society that was playful in spirit, slightlyintellectually subversive, characterized by the importance of male companionship and defined by a love of literature and learning. He wasPresident of the Stapeldon Society, failed at Classics, was once describedby the Sub-Rector at Exeter as “v. lazy” but, inspired by Edith Bratt,eventually became disciplined, switched to English and finished successfully. Those, at least, are the outlines of Garth’s portrait of Tolkien atExeter. To say more would be unfair to Garth’s essay, which should beread in its entirety. Suffice it to say that any future discussion of Tolkien’sbiography will want to draw on Garth’s research on his life at Exeter orbe considered incomplete.XXXXXXXX Gilliver, Weiner and Marshall chapter offers an excellent glimpseof Tolkien as a lexicographer and philologist. XXXXXXXX extended riff, in Gilliver’s section, on Tolkien’s “ability to make a task take longer than expected”—in reference to his association with a Chaucer volume for OxfordUniversity Press (begun in 1922 and ended, inconclusively, in 1960)—isparticularly gratifying. XXXXXXXX Weiner section offers illuminating researchon how “apparently dry, dull, and uninspired linguistic items” and textsthat are not compelling for their imaginative quality fired Tolkien’s creative imagination and gave him sources for important names, places, andterms in his lexicon, such as Brand, Hammerhand, Oliphaunt, Orc, Hollin, Treebeard, Warg, Mirkwood, and eleventy. Marshall’s section is notable for its review of Tolkien’s use of the plural “dwarves” and provides297Book Reviewsvaluable commentary on the usage patterns of that peculiar morphologyprior to and subsequent to Tolkien. Scholars researching Tolkien andlanguage will almost certainly want to include this essay among theirreferences in future work.Paraphrasing Tolkien himself, the most disappointing feature of Verlyn Flieger’s essay “Gilson, Smith, and Baggins” is its length: at just aboutten pages, it is too short. Still, it represents a brilliant beginning and anovel insight into the effect of the deaths of dear friends on Tolkien andinto the ways in which the author, through his fiction, found a way torepresent them and “honor the meaning of their lives” (85). For Flieger,Tolkien created Frodo to give meaning to Gilson’s meaningless death. Inthe four hobbits, he “recreated that ‘little complete body,’” known as theT.C.B.S., that was torn apart by death and war. In doing so, he “reared astructure ‘to be destroyed that we may regret it’” (92-93). Following thisbrief summary, I imagine that other readers will also wish to hear morefrom Flieger on this subject. It is my hope that she will continue andexpand what she has done so very well in this brief piece. As it is, the essay could be an excellent feature in an undergraduate or, under the rightcircumstances, graduate course on Tolkien.XXXXXXXX second set of essays, organized under the rubric “Mythos andModernity,” are promising but, on the whole, not of the same qualityas those in the first section. This reviewer found Patrick Curry’s essay“Enchantment in Tolkien and Middle-earth” insufficiently developedand, at times, somewhat lacking in coherence as it shifted from Max Weber to Karen Blixen to Buddha and to Jan Zwicky. His characterizationand discussion of Frodo’s “delight of the living tree itself ” in Lórien asa “lyric experience” (108) also left me slightly puzzled, not just for theunexpected focus on lyric, but also for what the analysis omitted, viz.a discussion of Tolkien’s notion of Recovery and commentary on hisconception of Machine. Marek Oziewicz’s essay “From Vico to Tolkien:XXXXXXXX Affirmation of Myth Against the Tyranny of Reason” is a beneficialattempt at situating Tolkien’s significance within a larger historical frameby illustrating parallels between Tolkien and Vico’s careers, works, andpassions, and drawing interesting inferences from each man’s novelty,academic marginalization, and popular success. In Vico and Tolkien,Oziewicz sees authors who “offered a viable humanistic philosophicalalternative to the deterministic, hegemonic, and oppressive modernity”and who “affirmed the value of myth and poetic understanding in theconstruction of human individuals and societies” (122). This is a thorough, coherent, and illuminating essay that creates the possibility for future research directions. One could similarly characterize Peter M. Candler, Jr.’s essay “Frodo or Zarathustra: Beyond Nihilism in Tolkien andNietzsche.” Candler’s observation that “Tolkien’s world is every bit as298Book Reviewsanti-Zarathustrian as Nietzsche’s is anti-Christian” (156) is certainly aptand insightful, though, given the points of comparison, it is less incisivethan Oziewicz’s observations on Tolkien and Vico.Part three of the volume, “Mythos and Logos,” contains essays byLeon Pereira, a Dominican friar; Alison, Milbank, a professor of Literature and XXXXXXXXology; and Guglielmo Spirito, a Franciscan friar. XXXXXXXXseare followed by a chapter by Stratford Caldecott, one of the volume’seditors, the organizer of the Oxford conference, and the director of theThomas More College Center for Faith and Culture. God, religion, andfaith obviously are important topics in Tolkien Studies, and they shouldnot be ignored. As Pereira makes plain: “XXXXXXXX issue of God and religionis not peripheral to an understanding of Tolkien and his work. In fact itis essential. You do not need to be Catholic to understand Tolkien, nor doyou need to believe what he believed in order to grasp his meaning, butyou must understand what he believed in order to appreciate his writings,especially the world of Middle-earth” (175).To the extent that this affirms the importance of historical context, culture, and personal biography to the study of an author and/or work, it is aworthwhile and essentially standard scholarly guidepost. XXXXXXXXre is no doubtthat Tolkien was a man of deep faith, and that his Catholicism shaped hisidentity, his outlook, his worldview, and ultimately his work. He has told usas much in his own words. In these final essays, many of Tolkien’s letters arerightly and extensively quoted to provide perspective on his work and religion. On this subject, his well-known letter to Milton Waldman deservesspecial attention. In this letter, reprinted as part of the Preface to theSecond Edition of XXXXXXXX Silmarillion, Tolkien carved out a space for hiscreative work so that it might fill a void he perceived in the history andmythology of England. He also famously lamented the shortcomings ofArthurian legend, calling it “imperfectly naturalized, associated with thesoil of Britain but not with English.” He continued, stating that the Arthurian world “does not replace what I felt to be missing. For one thingits ‘faerie’ is too lavish, and fantastical, incoherent and repetitive. Foranother and more important thing: it is involved in, and explicitly contains the Christian religion.” In the next line, starting a new paragraph,Tolkien said bluntly: “that seems to me fatal. Myth and fairy-story must,as all art, reflect and contain in solution elements of moral and religioustruth (or error) but not explicit, not in the known form of the primary‘real’ world” (S xii).In the light of this comment, reading Caldecott’s claim at the end ofthe volume: “I think you can detect a ‘hidden code’ that refers to Catholic themes and ideas, such as the Eucharist and the Blessed Virgin Mary,in XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings”: this reviewer wondered about the efficacy of acritical approach that tries to make explicit in Tolkien’s art things that the299Book Reviewsauthor expressly believed would be fatal to the art itself. Tolkien could beexplicit about his faith when he wished to be and he did use other meansbeyond his fiction to honor that faith and his commitment to it. His letters show that; his Epilogue to “On Fairy-stories” shows that. And hisletter to Milton Waldman clearly demonstrates that, to make art of thekind he considered worthy of his making, Tolkien believed he should notexplicitly inscribe it with the Christian religion as Arthurian legend so fatally did. XXXXXXXXre is something, of course, beautiful and moving in Tolkienthat should not be denied or suppressed. And it is hopeful and satisfyingto think that there is a spirit in his fiction that brings readers joy. In thisconnection, the essays in part three should be commended for showinghow Tolkien’s own personal inspirations may in turn inspire us as we takeon the “new challenges and new horizons” that Thomas Honegger, in hisconcluding essay, predicts for the field (236).GERALD SEAMANRIPON COLLEGERIPON, WISCONSINTolkien’s Oxford, by Robert S. Blackham. Stroud, Gloucestershire:XXXXXXXX History Press, 2008. 144p. £12.99 (trade paperback) ISBN9780752447292.Of the ancient English universities, Oxford holds a special place inthe public imagination that not even Cambridge (despite its at least equalacademic reputation and its equally historic buildings) can quite match.This perception probably has some roots in a degree of snobbery, but itis most evident in literary writings of the last century and a half, fromGerard Manley Hopkins’ “Towery city, and branchy between towers,”through such works as Gaudy Night, to Brideshead Revisited and beyond—aseries of nostalgic idylls that help feed the tourist industry of this bigpost-industrial city that happens to have a university in the middle. Mostof this literature has been written by those who were students or visitorsthere—temporary residents with rosy memories. Those who look rathermore steadily at the city and the university will find that this idyllic picture needs a certain degree of modification. For example, Oxford is notquite as hospitable or as pleasant as might be thought. In the nineteenthcentury, the notorious Master of Balliol, Benjamin Jowett, exemplifiedthe Oxford attitude; when the equally famous (outside Oxford) ProfessorJohn Stuart Blackie of Edinburgh said, “You mustn’t think too hardly ofus, Master!” Jowett replied, “We don’t think of you at all,” and a modified form of this attitude is still occasionally perceptible. In a differentsense, those getting to grips with the one-way system soon realize that299Book Reviewsauthor expressly believed would be fatal to the art itself. Tolkien could beexplicit about his faith when he wished to be and he did use other meansbeyond his fiction to honor that faith and his commitment to it. His letters show that; his Epilogue to “On Fairy-stories” shows that. And hisletter to Milton Waldman clearly demonstrates that, to make art of thekind he considered worthy of his making, Tolkien believed he should notexplicitly inscribe it with the Christian religion as Arthurian legend so fatally did. XXXXXXXXre is something, of course, beautiful and moving in Tolkienthat should not be denied or suppressed. And it is hopeful and satisfyingto think that there is a spirit in his fiction that brings readers joy. In thisconnection, the essays in part three should be commended for showinghow Tolkien’s own personal inspirations may in turn inspire us as we takeon the “new challenges and new horizons” that Thomas Honegger, in hisconcluding essay, predicts for the field (236).GERALD SEAMANRIPON COLLEGERIPON, WISCONSINTolkien’s Oxford, by Robert S. Blackham. Stroud, Gloucestershire:XXXXXXXX History Press, 2008. 144p. £12.99 (trade paperback) ISBN9780752447292.Of the ancient English universities, Oxford holds a special place inthe public imagination that not even Cambridge (despite its at least equalacademic reputation and its equally historic buildings) can quite match.This perception probably has some roots in a degree of snobbery, but itis most evident in literary writings of the last century and a half, fromGerard Manley Hopkins’ “Towery city, and branchy between towers,”through such works as Gaudy Night, to Brideshead Revisited and beyond—aseries of nostalgic idylls that help feed the tourist industry of this bigpost-industrial city that happens to have a university in the middle. Mostof this literature has been written by those who were students or visitorsthere—temporary residents with rosy memories. Those who look rathermore steadily at the city and the university will find that this idyllic picture needs a certain degree of modification. For example, Oxford is notquite as hospitable or as pleasant as might be thought. In the nineteenthcentury, the notorious Master of Balliol, Benjamin Jowett, exemplifiedthe Oxford attitude; when the equally famous (outside Oxford) ProfessorJohn Stuart Blackie of Edinburgh said, “You mustn’t think too hardly ofus, Master!” Jowett replied, “We don’t think of you at all,” and a modified form of this attitude is still occasionally perceptible. In a differentsense, those getting to grips with the one-way system soon realize that300Book Reviewsif you have business in Oxford you will know your way around, while ifyou do not know your way around you have no business being in Oxford.Moreover, the Town vs. Gown hostility still flourishes, especially on theTown side. Although university rags are much less antisocial these daysthan in the times when the highjacking of a bus by students was a fairlynormal event and upper-class undergraduates were frequently heardbaying for broken glass, students still can get picked on by locals, especially around Carfax on a Saturday night. Hopkins was not so enthralledas to ignore its underside, when he spoke of the city’s “base and brickishskirt,” and even the besotted Dorothy L. Sayers found her heroine’s puntgoing past the municipal tip. Moreover the university is often seen by itsdenizens as less than the ideal academic haven. As Joseph Wright said tothe young Tolkien:“What do you take Oxford for, lad?” “A university, a place oflearning.” “Nay, lad, it’s a factory! And what’s it making? I’lltell you. It’s making fees. Get that into your head, and you’llbegin to understand what goes on” (Letters 336).Tolkien however was not a temporary resident, but spent most of hisadult life in Oxford, mainly working; hence the glamour was temperedby grammar, both in the figurative and literal senses, and mundaneityplayed a greater part in his life than either rosy memories (his early nostalgic romantic vision was of Warwick rather than Oxford) or, conversely,horror stories of snobbery or isolation. He and his family were part ofthe everyday life of Oxford—shops, schools, pubs and the like—and hadtheir very normal place as moderately high-status locals. A great deal hasbeen written in various places about Tolkien’s everyday life, not least byTolkien himself in his letters and elsewhere, and there are various walking tours, real or virtual, of Tolkien-related places in Oxford. All thesame, somewhat surprisingly, the life story and the locations have seldomif ever been brought together—certainly not in a thorough study.Until now, that is. Enter Robert Blackham, known to British Tolkienists for his entertaining and informative presentations, particularly atOxonmoot, and more widely for his book XXXXXXXX Roots of Tolkien’s Middleearth, reviewed by Tom Shippey in Tolkien Studies IV (2007). This latter isa survey of Tolkien’s connections with Birmingham and district, which isobviously extremely important for the light it sheds on Tolkien’s formative years, and one would think had been pretty thoroughly covered elsewhere. Despite this, I believe that Blackham’s work breaks new ground,and does it splendidly, with brief excursions from the Birmingham areainto Worcestershire, Warwick and Oxford. Now he has taken on evenmore frequently trodden territory in his new book Tolkien’s Oxford. XXXXXXXXreis obviously a great deal of competition here, and readers will no doubt301Book Reviewswant to know how Blackham stands up to it.XXXXXXXX answer is: very well, in fact, by virtue of doing something different. This is not a guide book, nor strictly speaking a biography. Above allthis, like its predecessor, is a picture book that consists of photographs,paintings, sketches and maps (all contemporary whenever possible) linkedby a mainly chronological text, often with considerable detail. It begins bytracing Tolkien’s almost certain steps in December 1910 from the GreatWestern Railway station, along Park End Street, past the Castle Moundon the New Road, past Carfax, along the High Street, down King Edward Street to Merton Street and Corpus Christi, where he would beresident while sitting his entrance examination. XXXXXXXXn there follow thetwo routes by road from Birmingham to Oxford, one of which he wouldhave taken when he was a given a lift in Dickie Reynolds’s motor carwhen he went to Exeter College in 1911, together with a route map andphotos of places he is likely to have seen on the way. When he gets to Oxford there is less detail, but still plenty of photos of colleges and houses,together with places such as the Sheldonian XXXXXXXXatre and the RadcliffeCamera, and a humorous sketch depicting a “rag,” which shows whytownsfolk in general might have been less than friendly towards students(incidentally, one of the rioting mob is a dragon; the author wonders if itwould have got a grant). And so it continues, with detailed depictions ofthe places where Tolkien lived and worked, worshipped and drank—obviously the Eagle and Child, but also the Lamb and Flag, and the WhiteHorse (unfortunately Blackham does not repeat here the suggestion hemakes in his previous book, that the inn sign of the White Horse mighthave provided inspiration for the Prancing Pony), as well as places withC.S. Lewis associations, such as Addison’s Walk. Blackham also makesexcursions, for example to the Somme in 1916 (including a map) andless traumatically to the Rollwright Stones, the Uffington White Horse,and Wayland’s Smithy. XXXXXXXXre are also photographs of Wolvercote Cemetery, including one of Humphrey Carpenter’s grave. Tolkien Societyand Mythopoeic Society members will also recognise the Silver Tree andthe Golden Tree in the University Parks, planted by the Societies in 1992and now looking very impressive. XXXXXXXX book finishes with five pages ofsuggestions for places to visit.Apart from the pictures, there is the written commentary, which regrettably is not always of the same high standard. XXXXXXXXre are a few minorerrors, such as the fact that it was a bus, not a tram, that Tolkien highjacked, at least according to the Scull and Hammond Chronology (46);and Oxford’s spires are traditionally “dreaming” not “gleaming” (fromMatthew Arnold’s “Thyrsis”). XXXXXXXXre are also some doubtful statements.Charles Williams death may well have been a loss to Tolkien, but notreally a “great” one (that was Lewis). Finally, in the introduction, many302Book Reviewspeople will be mildly surprised to learn that Star Wars was inspired byTolkien’s work, and more than a few will disagree with the statementthat Peter Jackson “probably used more computing power than a spaceagency to produce what Tolkien must have seen in his mind’s eye” (9-10).And a mild regret: while venturing afield, the author might have visitedone or two of the “Farmer Giles” places, such as Thame (with an h—thatfolly without warrant) and Worminghall.Still, these are very minor blemishes on what is over all a delightfulbook. XXXXXXXXre are all sorts of unexpected details—for example, I have notmentioned the 1930s advertisement for a Morris-Cowley car that is probably the same make as the family’s old faithful “Jo.” XXXXXXXX older photosalso give a fitting sense of time as well as place. Certainly any Tolkienistsvisiting Oxford for the first time would be well advised to buy it, andmore experienced Oxford hands will certainly want it for pure nostalgicenjoyment (and they might even learn something as well).DAVID DOUGHANLONDON, ENGLANDWORKS CITEDBlackham, Robert S. XXXXXXXX Roots of Tolkien’s Middle-earth. Stroud: Tempus,2006.Hopkins, Gerard Manley. “Duns Scotus’s Oxford” in Poems. London:Humphrey Milford, 1918.Sayers, Dorothy L. Gaudy Night. London: Gollancz, 1935.Scull, Christina and Hammond, Wayne G. XXXXXXXX J.R.R. Tolkien Companionand Guide: Chronology. London: Harper Collins, 2006.Waugh, Evelyn. Brideshead Revisited. London: Chapman and Hall, 1945.Tolkien’s Shorter Works: Proceedings of the 4th Seminar of the Deutsche TolkienGesellschaft & Walking Tree Publishers Decennial Conference, edited by Margaret Hiley and Frank Weinreich. Zurich and Jena: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. [8], vi, 352 pp. $22.70 / £11.60 (trade paperback) ISBN9783905703115. Cormarë Series no. 17.This volume brings together sixteen essays first presented at a May2007 conference held at Friedrich Schiller University in Jena, jointlysponsored by Walking Tree Publishers (in celebration of their tenthanniversary) and the German Tolkien Society (Deutsche Tolkien Gesellschaft). XXXXXXXX focus of both conference and collection is on Tolkien’sshorter, lesser-known works, which the editors note have been unfairly302Book Reviewspeople will be mildly surprised to learn that Star Wars was inspired byTolkien’s work, and more than a few will disagree with the statementthat Peter Jackson “probably used more computing power than a spaceagency to produce what Tolkien must have seen in his mind’s eye” (9-10).And a mild regret: while venturing afield, the author might have visitedone or two of the “Farmer Giles” places, such as Thame (with an h—thatfolly without warrant) and Worminghall.Still, these are very minor blemishes on what is over all a delightfulbook. XXXXXXXXre are all sorts of unexpected details—for example, I have notmentioned the 1930s advertisement for a Morris-Cowley car that is probably the same make as the family’s old faithful “Jo.” XXXXXXXX older photosalso give a fitting sense of time as well as place. Certainly any Tolkienistsvisiting Oxford for the first time would be well advised to buy it, andmore experienced Oxford hands will certainly want it for pure nostalgicenjoyment (and they might even learn something as well).DAVID DOUGHANLONDON, ENGLANDWORKS CITEDBlackham, Robert S. XXXXXXXX Roots of Tolkien’s Middle-earth. Stroud: Tempus,2006.Hopkins, Gerard Manley. “Duns Scotus’s Oxford” in Poems. London:Humphrey Milford, 1918.Sayers, Dorothy L. Gaudy Night. London: Gollancz, 1935.Scull, Christina and Hammond, Wayne G. XXXXXXXX J.R.R. Tolkien Companionand Guide: Chronology. London: Harper Collins, 2006.Waugh, Evelyn. Brideshead Revisited. London: Chapman and Hall, 1945.Tolkien’s Shorter Works: Proceedings of the 4th Seminar of the Deutsche TolkienGesellschaft & Walking Tree Publishers Decennial Conference, edited by Margaret Hiley and Frank Weinreich. Zurich and Jena: Walking Tree Publishers, 2008. [8], vi, 352 pp. $22.70 / £11.60 (trade paperback) ISBN9783905703115. Cormarë Series no. 17.This volume brings together sixteen essays first presented at a May2007 conference held at Friedrich Schiller University in Jena, jointlysponsored by Walking Tree Publishers (in celebration of their tenthanniversary) and the German Tolkien Society (Deutsche Tolkien Gesellschaft). XXXXXXXX focus of both conference and collection is on Tolkien’sshorter, lesser-known works, which the editors note have been unfairly303Book Reviewsovershadowed by his longer, better-known works such as XXXXXXXX Hobbit, XXXXXXXXLord of the Rings, and XXXXXXXX Silmarillion. XXXXXXXXir goal, therefore, is to call attention to these works and show that they are more substantial and significant than has been generally realized—their thesis, in brief, being “that‘short’ these works may be but ‘minor’ they are not” (iv–v).This is a fine plan, and the proceedings’ contents range widely amongthe works in question. Smith of Wootton Major proves to be the most popular topic, being the focus of six essays; the other works considered hereinclude Farmer Giles of Ham (four essays), “Leaf by Niggle” (three), “OnFairy-stories” (two, although others cite it), XXXXXXXX Adventures of Tom Bombadil(with one essay devoted to the collection as a whole and four more tosingle poems within it), and single essays looking at XXXXXXXX Homecoming ofBeorthnoth, Roverandom, “Ides Ælfscyne” (one of the Songs for the Philologists), “Bilbo’s Last Song,” and “Mythopoeia”. 2 Wholly absent are XXXXXXXXFather Christmas Letters (in either their original or revised and expandedform), Mr. Bliss, “XXXXXXXX Lay of Aotrou and Itroun,” or “Imram.” XXXXXXXXcontributors’ European perspective offers the chance for fresh views onmostly well-known material, and the collection’s concept allows its contributors to range widely—I cannot recall, for example, seeing any critical work on Roverandom since it originally appeared a decade ago, while“Mythopoeia,” “Ides Ælfscyne,” and “Bilbo’s Last Song” have sufferedsimilar neglect. That said, it must be observed that, despite the claim inthe introduction that “each contribution was carefully proof-read” (v),the volume is somewhat editorially lax. Most notably, my copy had thewrong back cover text, giving a blurb describing XXXXXXXX Silmarillion ThirtyYears On, another book Walking Tree released at about the same time;3native English speakers will also be struck by the occasional unidiomaticword choice.It is disappointing that a collection devoted to remedying the relativelack of attention that has been paid to Tolkien’s minor works should itselfin its introduction make no mention of the two major previous attemptsto deal with these works: Paul Kocher’s pioneering work (the sixty-pagechapter “Seven Leaves”) in Master of Middle-earth (1972) and the TolkienSociety’s Leaves from the Tree: J.R.R. Tolkien’s Shorter Fiction (1991), with contributions by Tom Shippey, Christina Scull, Charles Noad, and others. Anumber of the individual essays herein quote from Kocher, and severalmore draw on pieces in Leaves from the Tree; recognition of their significance in Hiley and Weinreich’s introduction would have helped placethis volume within the larger context of Tolkien criticism as a whole.XXXXXXXX volume also unfortunately lacks any index, making cross-referencebetween the individual essays difficult.As for the essays, Allan Turner’s “‘Tom Bombadil’: Poetry and Accretion” looks at how Tolkien incorporated a disparate group of mostly304Book Reviewspre-existing poems into the world of XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings, primarily bythe framing device of the preface to XXXXXXXX Adventures of Tom Bombadil. Turner is excellent on the importance of “apparently unnecessary detail” inTolkien’s world-building (10), and for his observation that Tolkien’s firstpublished poem, “XXXXXXXX Battle of the Eastern Field,” can be said to setthe pattern for his poetry as a whole (5). Turner also does a good job oftracing how a single poem changed over time to gradually become incorporated within the mythology (8–9)—although perversely he choosesa poem (“XXXXXXXX Horns of Ylmir”) not included in XXXXXXXX Adventures of TomBombadil. But his failure to even address the issue of why Tolkien includedand excluded the pieces he did from among those available, and his division of all sixteen poems into six more or less arbitrary categories,4greatlyweaken his piece. Ultimately, his topic proves to be too large for a singleessay, and he ranges over the ground rather than delving into the heart ofhis thesis; it is to be hoped he will return to the topic at some future pointand deal with it in greater depth.By contrast, Guglielmo Spirito’s “Speaking With Animals: A Desirethat Lies Near the Heart of Faërie” is really a homily rather than anessay, offering a sort of impassioned meditation on the connectednessof all living things rather than advancing a rational argument. Spiritolinks Tolkien’s famous comment in “On Fairy-stories” about the desirefor communication with all things to observations by naturalists andepisodes from saints’ lives as well as examples from Tolkien’s own work(Farmer Giles of Ham’s Garm, the various creatures in “Bombadil GoesBoating”).5XXXXXXXX other three essays devoted to Bombadil poems all look at “XXXXXXXXSea-bell,” generally recognized as perhaps Tolkien’s finest poem, eachin connection with another work. Maria Raffaella Benvenuto’s “Smithof Wootton Major, ‘XXXXXXXX Sea-Bell’ and Lothlórien: Tolkien and the Perilsof Faërie” explores what we might call the Thomas Rhymer theme inTolkien’s works, stressing the dangers inherent in any mortal’s contactwith the Otherworld and placing Tolkien’s work into context with earliertreatments of the theme, both in folk ballads and more modern fare suchas Keats’s “La Belle Dame Sans Merci” and Coleridge’s “XXXXXXXX Rime ofthe Ancient Mariner.” Anna E. Slack’s far-ranging “A Star Above theMast: Tolkien, Faërie and the Great Escape” investigates the roles playedby belief in, and the right attitude towards, Faërie. She rather unusually blends Faith and Faërie, seeing a nun’s withdrawal from the world(Ancrene Wisse) and a dreamer’s reunion with his dead daughter (Pearl)as encounters with Faërie parallel to those of Smith and the narratorof “XXXXXXXX Sea-bell”; she even equates Niggle’s time spent painting withSmith’s journeys into Faery. Margaret Hiley’s “Journeys in the Dark”argues that both “XXXXXXXX Sea-bell” and Smith of Wootton Major represent305Book Reviewsfailed quests, since both feature visitors to Faërie who ultimately returnhome without mastering that strange realm. Her claim that Smith, beingmortal, cannot “gain knowledge” by his travels into Faërie seems oddlyto miss the point; surely he “failed” only if one imposes the simple Queststructure upon the tale, which Tolkien himself did not. I must also notethat at one point Hiley cites Todorov’s XXXXXXXX Fantastic but grossly misrepresents Todorov’s position.Of the four essays centered mainly on Farmer Giles of Ham, MarekOziewicz’s “Setting Things Right in Farmer Giles of Ham and XXXXXXXX Lord ofthe Rings: Tolkien’s Concept of Justice” scores points for originality: I neverexpected to see any interpretation of Farmer Giles in terms of the MunichCrisis (41). Oziewicz uses Giles’s career and the Scouring of the Shireas demonstrations for what he sees as a specific code of ideal justice thathe believes underlies all mythopoeic fantasy. In the case of Farmer Giles,he argues that the hero’s assumption of responsibility entitles him to theroyal titles he later claims, while the king’s evasions of responsibility voidhis right to rulership. By contrast, in the Scouring of the Shire, he seesthis justice taking the form of “appropriate corrective action” and “deeprespect for life.” Unfortunately, Oziewicz never satisfactorily defines this“compensational justice,” offering only negative examples and assertion,nor he does he persuasively link the two halves of his discussion.Vincent Ferré’s “XXXXXXXX Rout of the King: Tolkien’s Readings on Arthurian Kingship—Farmer Giles of Ham and XXXXXXXX Homecoming of Beorhtnoth” thinks Tolkien sharply critiques Arthur in oblique ways and findsArthurian parallels everywhere in Tolkien’s work, even in the name ofAragorn’s father (Arathorn > Arathorn > Arthor).6 Ferré’s linkage ofBeorhtnoth, Beowulf, and Arthur in a kind of triumvirate of failed leaders is intriguing, if harsh, but I suspect I’m not the only reader who willbe bemused by his offering up Túrin, of all people, as an example of a“responsible leader” who “accepts his responsibilities” and “will not actrashly” (69). Friedhelm Schneidewind’s “Farmer Giles of Ham: the Prototype of a Humorous Dragon Story” provides an interesting overviewof dragon legends and dragon-lore. His treatment of both the humorous and prototypical elements of his thesis is only cursory, and his essaywould have benefited from familiarity with Jonathan Evans’s and Christina Scull’s work on this topic, but I do not think anyone interested indragon-lore can read his piece without learning something new7—whichis, after all, one of the major points of scholarship. Patrick Brückner’s“‘. . . Until the Dragon Comes’: Tolkien’s Dragon-Motif as PoetologicalConcept” combines a subtle thesis with a rather muddled presentation,complete with charts and a Venn diagram. Brückner places great emphasis on the “Edge of the Wild” line on the Wilderland Map in XXXXXXXX Hobbit,first presenting this as a literal demarcation between the realistic world306Book Reviewsof Bilbo (and the reader) and the fantastic epic world epitomized by XXXXXXXXDragon, then reversing himself to argue that Tolkien’s relatively realistictreatment of Smaug undercuts that division and imports a “historical”element into what might otherwise be a fairy-tale. Perhaps his best pointis to acknowledge the influence of Beowulf ’s dragon upon Smaug whileinsisting that here Tolkien greatly improved upon his source (114).With Thomas Fornet-Ponse’s “XXXXXXXXology and Fairy-Stories: A XXXXXXXXological Reading of Tolkien’s Shorter Works?” the emphasis shifts to “OnFairy-stories.” Fornet-Ponse explicates Tolkien’s theory, as expressed in“Mythopoeia,” “On Fairy-stories,” and elsewhere, that human creativityis the consequence of humanity itself being a creation. He then brieflyapplies Tolkien’s prescriptions in “On Fairy-stories” to his own practicein Roverandom, “Leaf by Niggle,” Farmer Giles of Ham, and Smith of Wootton Major, and seems to doubt whether any of the four fully qualifies as afairy-story as Tolkien described it.XXXXXXXX next block of essays deal primarily with “Leaf by Niggle.” Ofthese, Bertrand Alliot’s “XXXXXXXX ‘Meaning’ of Leaf by Niggle” de-emphasizesan autobiographical interpretation and instead focuses on the underlying“laws” of Niggle’s home country which the hapless artist finds so difficult to obey, with an aside near the end to look at the quality of distantlandscapes Niggle seeks to capture. Alliot’s is the most intriguing piecein the whole collection, but I think few will agree with his conclusionsthat Tolkien’s message is that Parish is right and Niggle wrong; that itis morally wrong to build a painting shed on a patch where one shouldgrow potatoes; that Tolkien emerged from World War I convinced thatfantasy and poetry were unimportant and “never took his creative workseriously” again (177–178). In biographical fact the first thing Tolkiendid when he was strong enough to hold a pencil again after leaving thetrenches was to embark full-throttle upon the massive work of creatinghis legendarium. Essentially Alliot is one with those who in Tolkien’s “Allegory of the Tower” criticize the Beowulf-poet for “not [restoring] theold house,” and ignore Tolkien’s final line: But from the top of that tower theman had been able to look out upon the Sea.Heidi Steimel’s “XXXXXXXX Autobiographical Tolkien” takes a much morestandard approach in her juxtaposition of “Leaf by Niggle” and Smith ofWootton Major but does it exceptionally well—in fact, I would say this isthe finest autobiographical interpretation of both tales that I have seen,and the volume’s single best piece. She also deserves praise for stressingthat this is not the only possible approach but rather her own exercise of“applicability,” and for her conclusion that both tales would still be worthreading simply as stories, without any autobiographical context. Fabian Geier’s thoughtful “Leaf by Tolkien?[:] Allegory and Biography inTolkien’s Literary XXXXXXXXory and Practice” also centers on “applicability,”307Book Reviewsthough Geier’s is a more theoretical piece that looks at the various formsof allegory and their role—as well as that of source materials (mainlybiographical but also literary)—in Tolkien’s work. Geier offers many insights as well as the occasional provocative statement, such as his beliefthat subcreation can be detached from its explicitly Christian roots because it is “essentially more (neo)platonic than genuinely Christian” (225)or his claim that “Leaf by Niggle” is “incoherent” as a stand-alone storywhen deprived of its allegorical content (228).Like so many other essays here, Martin Simonson’s “Redefining theRomantic Hero: A Reading of Smith of Wootton Major in the Light of Ludwig Tieck’s Der Runenberg” compares Smith of Wootton Major with anotherwork; what sets his apart is that he contrasts Smith with an non-Tolkienian work, a German literary fairy tale from 1804. Simonson admits thatthere’s no evidence Tolkien ever read Tieck’s story, and unfortunately hisessay fails to establish that either casts any significant light on the other;“XXXXXXXX Sea-bell” might have made a better pairing with Tieck’s tale. Martin Sternberg’s “Smith of Wootton Major Considered as a Religious Text”also looks outside for explication of a Tolkien text, but rather more successfully; he discusses ways in which Smith’s experiences of Faery parallel those of mystics within the Christian tradition, such as the author ofXXXXXXXX Cloud of Unknowing, and does a fine job of bringing the two together.Other than an apparent determination to use the phrase “ruth and delight” as many times as possible, Sternberg’s only shortcoming is thathe does not distinguish between Tolkien’s afterthoughts in the essay hewrote about Smith and what was in his mind when he wrote the storyitself (a tendency he shares with other contributors to this collection). Finally, Frank Weinreich’s “Metaphysics of Myth: XXXXXXXX Platonic Ontologyof ‘Mythopoeia’” gives us a line-by-line reading and interpretation ofthe poem, comparing Tolkien’s undertaking to works by Keats, Lucretius,Pope, and especially Plato. It’s good to see this major piece get some longoverdue attention, though those unfamiliar with terms like “ontology”and “zoon logon echon” may find Weinreich’s explication heavy going attimes. His conclusion that Tolkien’s thought is “pure Platonism” (344)makes him sound oddly like old Professor Diggory in Narnia, especiallywhen he dismisses the idea of competing influences from Tolkien’s Christianity or the writings of Owen Barfield (whom Weinreich, bizarrely, describes as a Gnostic) with the claim that both “developed Christian theology” and Gnosticism are themselves based on Plato.Completists of course will no doubt want to acquire this collection,along with the sixteen volumes in the Cormarë line that preceded it andall those which will follow. While many of these essays do not tell youmuch more than you could learn by reading and musing over Tolkien’swork yourself, this should not discourage those interested in the full range308Book Reviewsof Tolkien’s work from seeking out this collection. And the best of thepieces here—Turner, Schneidewind, Alliot, Steimel, and Sternberg—represent a real contribution to Tolkien studies.JOHN D. RATELIFFKENT, WASHINGTONNOTES1 Ironically, not all of their contributors seem to agree with them—cf.Anna Slack’s comment in her essay about “the minor works on whichI have chosen to focus” (266); the term is also used by Ferré (61), Fornet-Ponse (153), Steimel (193), Benvenuto (251), and Hiley (291).2 Many of these essays juxtapose two or more of these works; hencethe numbers given here add up to more than sixteen, the total number of essays in the collection.3 I have since seen another copy with the correct back cover text, socollectors should note that this book exists in at least two states.4 Turner’s categories are (i) Mysterious (“XXXXXXXX Sea-bell”), (ii) Philological—serious (“XXXXXXXX Hoard”), (iii) Philological—playful (“Oliphaunt”and “Fastitocalon”, the two Man-in-the-Moon poems, and “XXXXXXXXStone Troll”), (iv) Metrical experiments (“Errantry”), (v) Parody andSatire (“Perry-the-Winkle”), and (vi) Miscellaneous. This last category, which Turner describes as “doodles of Tolkien’s idle moments,”seems to include the book’s seven remaining poems, but explicitlyincludes “Princess Mee” and “Shadow Bride,” the latter of whichone might think would be more persuasively described as belongingto his first category, Mysterious.5 Spirito’s piece is enlivened with gnomic utterances—“it is the distance that makes the fire kind” (18), “Every form of life participatesin the light soul and also in the darkness of suffering” (19), “cows . . .are not burdened by ultimate questions” (25)—as well as the occasional insight (“XXXXXXXX legends of saints will endure since they serve thisdeep need that we have: to believe that what we long for is possible” [32]).6 At one point Ferré claims Augustus Bonifacius in Farmer Giles of Hamis an Arthurian figure for two reasons: (1) he is the exact opposite ofsome famous portrayals of Arthur and (2) he is just like other lesserknown portrayals of Arthur—which is trying to have it both ways atonce.7 For example, who knew there were eighty-three distinct dragon saintsrecognized by the Church? (81–82).309Book ReviewsTruths Breathed Through Silver: XXXXXXXX Inklings’ Moral and Mythopoeic Legacy, ed.Jonathan B. Himes, with Joe R. Christopher and Salwa Khoddam. Newcastle, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2008. xviii, 160 pp. £29.99/ $59.99 (hardcover). ISBN 9781847184443.This collection was garnered from a decade of annual conferences(I have never attended any of them—alas) beginning at Oklahoma CityUniversity in 1998, which gave rise to and were subsequently sponsoredby the C. S. Lewis and Inklings Society (incorporated in 2004). XXXXXXXXchoice of name makes plain on which particular Inkling the Society hasits focus, and indeed four of these ten essays are devoted to some aspect of Lewis’s work while another three consider Lewis prominently inconjunction with other writers. Readers of Tolkien Studies may be mostinterested that J.R.R. Tolkien is one of the other writers in two of thesecases, an ancillary figure in other essays (notably one discussing Lewisand language), and the primary subject of two chapters. Charles Williams is the only other regular member of the Inklings considered here,along with proto-Inklings (if one may so call them) George MacDonaldand G. K. Chesterton.This is descriptive merely: those interested in other members of theremarkable Inklings group (e.g, Owen Barfield or Nevill Coghill or LordDavid Cecil, et al.) are alerted to look elsewhere. It must have been difficult enough to distill papers from ten conferences into a volume of tenessays without also trying to represent more than a few of the OxfordInklings.Half of the papers are from keynote speakers at the C. S. Lewis andInklings Society conferences, and the volume opens with the keynotefrom the first conference in 1998. Joe R. Christopher identifies “C. S.Lewis’s Three Paths to God” as (in essence) via reason, ethics, and thetranscendent, with careful distinctions of what these meant to Lewis, andthat their conjunction led him to a theistic view of the universe but notspecifically to the Christian religion. Interestingly, he focuses on a workthat has not been overmuch discussed in Lewis criticism, although it wasthis author’s first published book of Christian apologetics and of prosefiction: XXXXXXXX Pilgrim’s Regress: An Allegorical Apology for Christianity, Reason andRomanticism (1933; the third edition of 1943 has some very needed explanatory notes). Professor Christopher mines this early Bunyanesquebook for concerns that Lewis developed throughout his career, so he alsotouches on many later works, and shows that Lewis has remained a relevant thinker because his ideas have been found valuable by many peoplethroughout many social changes over many years. He also indicates whyLewis does not persuade those who are committed to natural philosophyonly: they tend to be pragmatists. While, for example, they agree that310Book Reviewsbeings capable of reasoning with some clarity have in fact appeared in auniverse they consider non-rational, they no more worry that technicallythis is logically inconsistent than they used to be concerned when foryears it was thought to be mathematically impossible for a bumblebee tofly (the math has since been done to show that it is).A small point is that he posits a new (and, to my mind, more plausible) theory as to why Lewis largely abandoned his closely reasoned butpopular apologetics after the 1940s. XXXXXXXX prevailing idea has been thatLewis was discouraged by having his logic challenged by G.E.M. Anscombe from within his own philosophical camp of Christian intellectuals, but this does not seem likely for such a skilled debater who was wontto describe himself as “hungry for rational opposition,”1 and who wasable to reply to his challenger quite well on her own highly sophisticatedground. Christopher suggests that he felt he had shot his bolt (or, rather,his three bolts, having much explored the “three paths”) and was readyto turn to other modes like the fairy tale in any case; a further point beingthat Lewis wanted to address the general public and it is difficult to dothat while also speaking to every nuance to satisfy a specialist.2This keynote address does indeed set the tone for most of the papers: thoughtful reflections by a (usually but not necessarily) Christianscholar on universal moral concerns encapsulated in mythic literature.XXXXXXXX title of the collection indicates this, coming from Tolkien’s rejoinderto the then-atheist Lewis’s objection that the world’s mythologies are lieseven though beautiful: Tolkien replied that myths show people trying toapprehend truth through the imagination rather than ratiocination andthat both avenues should be used.Of the two essays devoted to Tolkien, Jason Fisher’s is in this mode.“Tolkien’s Fortunate Fall and XXXXXXXX Third XXXXXXXXme of Ilúvatar” examinesthe topos of the felix culpa (God bringing a greater good out of an evildeed) from Melkor to Gollum, noting that the author’s mythology is notcompletely consistent with his Catholic orthodoxy (he was not originallytrying to do that and his models, after all, were mostly pagan) but is imbued with his deep-rooted Christianity. Tolkien’s religious beliefs haveless overt relevance to “A Brief History of Libraries in Middle-earth” byDavid Oberhelman other than that it is good to organize collections ofknowledge. Such repositories anywhere on Arda tend to suffer a fate asdire as Tolkien’s real-world model of the great library of Alexandria, aswitness the destructions of Gondolin and Númenor. Oberhelman tracesthe importance of what we would call libraries (he can find only oneinstance where Tolkien uses this term) in the legendarium, culminatingin the books written by the Hobbits which become the fictional source ofour knowledge of this feigned history.XXXXXXXXologian Kerry Dearborn’s “XXXXXXXX Sacrament of the Stranger in311Book ReviewsC. S. Lewis, J.R.R. Tolkien, and George MacDonald” examines howthe virtue of hospitality (which subsumes courtesy, mercy, empathy, trust)supports moral and spiritual growth in characters such as Ransom, Frodo, Gimli, and Curdie. She draws particularly on the Celtic tradition ofChristianity (and on the experience of her own family as strangers inPeru) but might have added that hospitality was a paramount virtue tomost ancient peoples, notably the writers of the Old Testament. XXXXXXXX other chapter on Tolkien among a number of authors, Thomas Howard’s“Lewis, Tolkien, and Williams as Spiritual Mentors,” is wisely left in itsoriginal form as an after-dinner speech: revising it into a more formalessay would weaken its charm and immediacy. Howard knows these authors well (and he adds in George MacDonald), recollecting charactersand scenes in a meandering fashion, each of them (for one example,Sam’s awe in Lothlórien) having taught him something about being agood person.Tom Shippey contributes a thoughtful examination of Lewis as aphilologist, with particular attention to XXXXXXXX Screwtape Letters and Studies inWords, and his agreement with his contemporaries George Orwell andTolkien that corruptions in language (used not only for deception but forself-deception) underlie much of what was evil in the twentieth century.Normally good people can be induced to do very bad things if they arebefuddled into thinking it is for a good cause.XXXXXXXX other essays continue the main theme of morality and mythopoeia. Rolland Hein’s “Doors Out and Doors In: XXXXXXXX Genius of Myth”demonstrates the mythic apprehension of truth. Mathematician DavidL. Neuhouser notes how his field of study figures as an intellectual andspiritual discipline in the life and work of George MacDonald. Co-editorSalwa Khoddam has a lengthy examination of the images of the ruinedcity and the Edenic garden in XXXXXXXX Magician’s Nephew while editor-in-chiefJonathan Himes takes a careful look at deviant sexuality in the unfinishedDark Tower (he playfully calls his chapter “XXXXXXXX Allegory of Lust”).XXXXXXXX introduction by Professor Himes gives useful background onthe provenance of the essays and a good overview of each. XXXXXXXX editorsshould feel gratified that every chapter in this little book is well-written,scholarly, and worthwhile for students of mythopoeic literature.RICHARD C. WESTUNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN-MADISONNOTES1 C. S. Lewis and E.M.W. Tillyard, XXXXXXXX Personal Heresy: A Controversy(Oxford University Press, 1965 [first published in 1939]), chapter III,49.312Book Reviews2 Lewis makes this point himself in his “Rejoinder” to another fellowChristian, W. Norman Pittenger, Christian Century 75 (November 26,1958): 1359-61.Book NotesIn the fall of 2008, there appeared an expanded version of the omnibus of Tolkien’s shorter works, Tales from the Perilous Realm, which wasoriginally published in 1997. It now includes Roverandom, Farmer Giles ofHam, XXXXXXXX Adventures of Tom Bombadil, Smith of Wootton Major, “Leaf by Niggle,” and, as an appendix, “On Fairy-stories.” XXXXXXXXre are illustrations andan “Afterword” by Alan Lee, and an “Introduction” by Tom Shippey.XXXXXXXX UK edition, published in hardcover by HarperCollins (Price £18.99ISBN 9780007257546) is taller than the US edition from Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (Price $28.00 ISBN 9780547154114), and the colored illustration by Alan Lee on the endpapers appears only in the UK edition.Tolkien’s Gedling 1914: XXXXXXXX Birth of a Legend, by Andrew H. Morton andJohn Hayes, is a slim trade paperback publication from Brewin Books.It primarily concerns Tolkien’s Aunt Jane and her Phoenix Farm inGedling, near Nottingham, which Tolkien visited in September 1914,when he wrote the poem about Earendel that was the germ of his invented mythology. Price £9.95 ISBN 9781858584232.In early 2009, ADC Publications released Black & White Ogre Country:XXXXXXXX Lost Tales of Hilary Tolkien, edited by Angela Gardner and illustratedby Jef Murray. This small hardcover reproduces the sketchy tales from anotebook by Tolkien’s brother, Hilary Arthur Reuel Tolkien (1894-1976),relating to their childhood. XXXXXXXX short sketches are augmented by numerous illustrations, and the book closes with “A Brief Biography of HilaryTolkien,” which includes family photographs and letters. Price £9.95ISBN 9780955190018.XXXXXXXX Ring Goes Ever On: Proceedings of the Tolkien 2005 Conference: 50 Yearsof “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,” edited by Sarah Wells, appeared near the endof 2008 in two very large trade paperback volumes, sold as a set andpublished by XXXXXXXX Tolkien Society. XXXXXXXXse volumes collect nearly one hundred papers presented at the conference held at Aston University, Birmingham, 11th-15th August 2005. A full review will appear in the nextvolume of Tolkien Studies. Ordering information, including prices withvarious shipping options, can be found at <www.tolkiensociety.org>.Two collections of criticism related primarily to Peter Jackson’s filmsof XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings are worth noting here. Martin Barker and Ernest312Book Reviews2 Lewis makes this point himself in his “Rejoinder” to another fellowChristian, W. Norman Pittenger, Christian Century 75 (November 26,1958): 1359-61.Book NotesIn the fall of 2008, there appeared an expanded version of the omnibus of Tolkien’s shorter works, Tales from the Perilous Realm, which wasoriginally published in 1997. It now includes Roverandom, Farmer Giles ofHam, XXXXXXXX Adventures of Tom Bombadil, Smith of Wootton Major, “Leaf by Niggle,” and, as an appendix, “On Fairy-stories.” XXXXXXXXre are illustrations andan “Afterword” by Alan Lee, and an “Introduction” by Tom Shippey.XXXXXXXX UK edition, published in hardcover by HarperCollins (Price £18.99ISBN 9780007257546) is taller than the US edition from Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (Price $28.00 ISBN 9780547154114), and the colored illustration by Alan Lee on the endpapers appears only in the UK edition.Tolkien’s Gedling 1914: XXXXXXXX Birth of a Legend, by Andrew H. Morton andJohn Hayes, is a slim trade paperback publication from Brewin Books.It primarily concerns Tolkien’s Aunt Jane and her Phoenix Farm inGedling, near Nottingham, which Tolkien visited in September 1914,when he wrote the poem about Earendel that was the germ of his invented mythology. Price £9.95 ISBN 9781858584232.In early 2009, ADC Publications released Black & White Ogre Country:XXXXXXXX Lost Tales of Hilary Tolkien, edited by Angela Gardner and illustratedby Jef Murray. This small hardcover reproduces the sketchy tales from anotebook by Tolkien’s brother, Hilary Arthur Reuel Tolkien (1894-1976),relating to their childhood. XXXXXXXX short sketches are augmented by numerous illustrations, and the book closes with “A Brief Biography of HilaryTolkien,” which includes family photographs and letters. Price £9.95ISBN 9780955190018.XXXXXXXX Ring Goes Ever On: Proceedings of the Tolkien 2005 Conference: 50 Yearsof “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,” edited by Sarah Wells, appeared near the endof 2008 in two very large trade paperback volumes, sold as a set andpublished by XXXXXXXX Tolkien Society. XXXXXXXXse volumes collect nearly one hundred papers presented at the conference held at Aston University, Birmingham, 11th-15th August 2005. A full review will appear in the nextvolume of Tolkien Studies. Ordering information, including prices withvarious shipping options, can be found at <www.tolkiensociety.org>.Two collections of criticism related primarily to Peter Jackson’s filmsof XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings are worth noting here. Martin Barker and Ernest313Book ReviewsMathijs co-edited Watching “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings”: Tolkien’s World Audiences,published in trade paperback in late 2007 by Peter Lang. Price $32.95ISBN 9780820463964. Adam Lam and Nataliya Oryshchuk co-editedHow We Became Middle-earth: A Collection of Essays on “XXXXXXXX Lord of the Rings,”a trade paperback also issued in late 2007, from Walking Tree Publishers.Price $28.00 ISBN 9783905703078.DOUGLAS A. ANDERSON